here we go 5 4 3 2 1 David Joe how are
you sir
great thanks thanks for being here man I
appreciate it thanks having you know
really looking forward to talking to you
very much so
this is a fascinating subject for me
anti-aging the idea that you'll be able
to stop aging or even possibly pull it
back or if they're very least slowed
down what do you think I think that's
all on the table we've been doing this
for years in the lab now we could just
gotta figure out how to do it in people
when I talked to someone like you as an
actual research scientist of this stuff
I always want to know what are you doing
to yourself ah how long have you got
like what do you do a daily base I do
first of all are you 100 years old get
in there how old yeah 20 50 so you turn
50 mm-hmm I wouldn't have thought you
were 50 I would have figured you're
about 41 42 well that's kind of you well
my brother's the negative control and
he's he's delivered shit well I can't
say that but people say that he doesn't
look as young as me and he's about three
and a half years younger oh so what are
you doing personally well you know most
of the time I'm in a lab and trying to
run a bunch of companies to make these
drugs a reality but daily I try to keep
a healthy weight I do
intermittent fasting which is pretty
easy because I'm so busy I forget to eat
how many hours do you give yourself
every night uh well I suffer from late
night snacking but I try to skip
breakfast and even skip lunch if I'm
busy so I'm a night eater but that
seemed to be good because a study came
out about a couple of weeks ago at least
in mice that it's not what you eat it's
when you eat that's most important for
longevity really and when when being
when like what's the best it doesn't
actually matter if you eat a lot in the
morning or a lot at night I like
nighttime eating but you need a period
during the day at least if you're a
mouse probably if you're a human where
you're hungry and that puts your body in
a defensive mode and these are the
things that we've been studying my lab
for the last 20 years what are the
processes that diet and exercise do for
us they keep us healthy and why does
calorie restriction and intermittent
fasting make animals live
so much longer and we think we've
figured out a large part of how that
works and now we're mimicking that with
molecules is the is the idea that you
can mimic it with molecules and it'll be
as effective as intermittent fasting
I think the molecules will be better and
not only that when we add them onto a
healthy diet and exercise any animals
they do even better it's like a
supercharged Mouse now when you add them
on to the mice do you also add them on
with intermittent fasting and is there
an additional benefit we do we do one of
the first molecules that inference
molecules that we are known for is
resveratrol
from red wine that molecule discovered
it in like 30 so at least linked it
aging what we showed was that if you
give it to a fat Mouse they're as
healthy as a thin Mouse they live just
as long they didn't get heart disease
and all of the other bad stuff then what
we did was interesting we gave it to the
mice either everyday in their food or
let them skip a meal every day so that
they were fed every other day and that
combination of resveratrol plus every
other day feeding we had the longest
lifespan we'd ever seen and it was salt
was additive same with exercise if we
give our latest molecule called atom an
to a mouse and we exercise it it'll run
even further than it could with either
of those alone so it's not an excuse to
sit around and just eat chips and watch
TV it old man's healthy lifestyle gets
you further than what you could get
naturally so in any are you seeing a
benefit in addition so is the idea to
compound all those things together
exactly right so you asked about myself
so I I do I eat healthy I try to skip
meals I also take supplements and in
fact most of my colleagues are in the
field of aging or anti aging as people
call it so I take animun every morning
what is nm and good question so let me
take a quick step ashore so about 20
years ago
Lenny gurantee and a team of us at MIT
discovered a set of genes that controls
Aging in yeast cells just brewers yeast
what you find in beer and bread and
those jeans are called sirtuins and
there are seven of them in our bodies
five in yeast and what they do is they
protect all organisms on the planet
plants bacteria humans from
deterioration and disease they're like
the Pentagon they sense when we're
hungry since when we're exercising and
they send out the troops to defend us so
when you when you put more of these
genes into a yeast cell or a mouse
they'll live longer between five to 20
percent longer and so we think that
these genes are responsible for the
effects of dieting and exercise which is
great which what that means is we can
now mimic that with molecules so an
amine is one of those molecules so is
resveratrol you can think of virtual as
the accelerator pedal for the sirtuin
genes and the animators that is a fuel
and without fuel reserve Lorent work so
any man is the gas in the car
I've heard of resveratrol but is nmn a
new molecule this is commercially
available some people have started
selling it on the internet it's related
to n R which is sold by a bunch of
companies and our yeah nicotine my
driver-side is a supplement that raises
the levels of a molecule called nad
shopping list so they get a pen so why
are you writing that down to that so
there's our two ins okay get this so
sirtuins
need nad mmm-hmm to work without them
they don't work in fact if you don't
have nad in your body you'd be dead in
about 30 seconds it's a really important
molecule but as we get older we lose any
T so by the time you're 50 like I almost
am you have about the half the levels of
once or you had when you're 20 so that's
not good
and these sirtuins they don't protect
the body without high levels of nad so
what n MN does and this other molecule
called NR which both you can get on the
internet they boost the body's levels of
nad back up to youthful levels again and
if we give them to mice these molecules
t2 mice or even two worms or yeast they
live longer and they're super healthy
now what level how many milligrams are
you taking of these things so yeah n MN
is is something I get from for myself
I'd I'm not selling anything so I take a
gram of any men in the morning based on
clinical trials has been shown that that
will raise any deed with or without food
I take a little bit of yogurt that I
make my cell
at home just to me you have been doing
this for a while and I only start doing
stuff when I see it working animals
first so take take the yogurt mix in
some resveratrol resveratrol is great
but it's really insoluble it's like
brick dust so in the yogurt it will
dissolve take another half a gram of
resurrect roll and how much half a gram
yeah it's a it's a powder I have a few
kilos left over from clinical trials in
my basement so yeah that that's gonna
last me a few decades and then I also
take at night some metformin which is
probably the most radical thing that I
take which is a prescribed level drug
for diabetes net Foreman met met M MIT
and prescribed Abul drug so you don't
have diabetes I do not but you take it
for for preventing cancer heart disease
Alzheimer's and aging met fucking spell
Emmy t fo RM i N and so out of studies
of 10,000 people and more it's been
shown that people who take med form in
even if they have diabetes are protected
against other diseases of aging even
frailty and some most scientists if you
ask them in my field will say yeah
metformin is likely to extend your
lifespan it's just that the FDA doesn't
let you have it for aging because aging
isn't a disease yet so do you have to
get diabetes to get it or do you have to
get a sneaky doctor well I wouldn't call
a sneaky doctor but the doctor typically
has to be convinced because they don't
keep up with the literature and it's
it's off-label okay alright and how much
do you take it out I take a gram of that
as well which is about a low dose as
some diabetics take 2 grams so it's not
crazy amounts as they're in side effects
well the good news is that it's
extremely rare that you get sick from
any of these molecules in millions of
patients around the world
nobody's getting sick the worst you'll
have as far as I can tell is a stomach
upset and I get that which is actually
helpful if I'm hungrier I lose my
appetite
but I think the downside is extremely
low and that the upside is you know
anything's better than what's coming and
what is the mechanism that
foreman is operating okay so that so
this is the great thing is that over the
last 20 years we have figured out we
scientists have figured out that there
are universal regulators of aging from
yeast to worms to mice and in humans and
there are three main pathways that we
figured out respond to what we eat and
how we exercise and one of them is
called
ampk and this is a target metformin and
so I'm active when I take med form and
I'm activating my AMPK which will send
out the troops the sirtuins I've
mentioned that's the second of the
pathways and so I take animun and
research all for that and then the third
one is called mTOR which is a pathway in
the body that responds to how many amino
acids how much meat you're eating and it
will also protect the body if you tweak
it just the right way and there's only
besides eating low amounts of protein
the only way to affect their pathways
with a drug called rapamycin which is
which is a little dangerous to try and
is is used for immunosuppressant so it's
not something that I would recommend and
I don't take it Wow so this is your
daily routine along with what what kind
of like diet do you follow well I I try
to not eat too much it's pretty easy to
overeat so I try to skip one or two
meals a day
I avoid sugars and carbs I try to run
once a week I do workouts on the weekend
like you I love saunas I like to put my
body in some temperature stress so I go
heat and then I jump in a cold bath
mm-hmm back and forth that that works
well for yeast we can do that in lab and
they live 30% longer so there's all that
you have generally generally I eat
normally do you ever try going from
sauna to cryotherapy no I haven't tried
actual cryotherapy just to oh you
haven't done it at all no you want to do
it today
harvey got one yeah yeah we'll take you
take you down the street there's a great
one because it's there's different kinds
and some of them are from the neck down
where they're using liquid nitrogen the
other ones they actually freeze the air
so when they're they're using the
nitrogen to freeze the air and they're
pumping in air that's 240 degrees below
zero and you're you know you're gonna do
about two minutes I do three because I
do it all the time but it's awesome I do
three and then I take ten minutes off
and I go back in for another three yeah
makes sense and what you're doing to
your body when you do that we think is
to activate these longevity pathways
like this or two ends yeah and and
that's really the trick is to activate
your body's defenses against aging I
mean the old theories about aging you've
got to throw them out most people at
parties will tell you oh antioxidants
free radicals DNA damage or mutations
that is all for the most part in correct
that antioxidants cause DNA damage no
that's true that it repairs DNA damage
well antioxidants have been a rather big
failure in the aging field but
resveratrol is an antioxidant correct
it's a mild antioxidant but it doesn't
work by being in Antioch so what does it
work what is the pathway it steps on the
accelerator pedal of these sirtuin
enzyme okay and so it's directly
controlling the body's defenses against
aging so as we discussed it or as people
discussed it as an antioxidant it was
just a mild form of antibiotics
antioxidant but it didn't so much more
right and we know this because if you
create a yeast cell or a worm or a mouse
and then you knock out the gene for the
sirtuin now reversal doesn't help the
animal anymore that's interesting
because when people talk about wine
that's the one thing they say the
resveratrol is and antioxidants really
good for you yeah this is one of those
open myths that never goes away and
still fuels a billion dollar industry
but what we're finding is that the
molecules in plants like resveratrol
first of all that we think they're
produced by plants because the plants
are benefiting from the stress we call
it hormesis a little bit of stress is
good for you what doesn't kill you makes
you stronger kind of thing and hormesis
was discovered oh about 60 70 years ago
when people were spraying herbicides on
plants and a little bit of herbicide
actually made them stronger and we think
that these molecules and plants are
similar they make the plant stronger
during times of stress so if you stress
a grape
that's four winemaking you'll get great
wine but you also get a lot of
resveratrol and so when we ingest that
resveratrol from the plants
we get the same health benefits because
the plants are activating their sirtuin
pathways and we have the sirtuins and
they activate us as well
ah interesting interesting so low carb
low sugar any specific type of protein
do you limit your amount of protein yeah
I mean I enjoy eating mammals just as
much as anybody but I try to avoid them
for the main or two main reasons one is
that there's this TMAO a molecule that
seems to cause heart disease TMAO yeah
yeah and how is it linked heart disease
is these epidemiology studies I forget
but I do recall that the study was able
to give the TMAO to animals and they
developed heart disease so it's somehow
causing it I forget exactly how it might
be damaging the genome that's my
recollection with omnivores or predators
I think as red meat is the culprit right
so are they giving this to rats are they
giving this to there was a male study
again so I mean mice might be different
from humans of course yeah
but the other problem with with meat in
general from from animals is that
there's a lot of mean always in there
and it's easy to eat a lot of meat and
so if you have high levels of amino
acids it will activate this mTOR pathway
one of those three longevity pathways
and you don't want that you don't want
that you don't want that because mTOR
has evolved to sense times of adversity
and stress and hunger so why do people
see a performance benefit when they
consume branched chain amino acids
really good question so in the short run
just like taking testosterone it will
give you performance benefits but we
think in the long run it will actually
come back to bite you so how will blend
branched chain amino acids come back to
bite you so branch chain amino acids
will activate this mTOR pathway and when
we do that in animals we actually we
reduce their lifespan so it's the
opposite you want to keep those levels
low that's interesting that seems I mean
for a dummy like me it seems
counterintuitive because what's making
you perform better
you would see you would think especially
something like amino-acids a natural
part of the human body you would think
that would be beneficial you're adding
to your body something that it needs
yeah you would but but what you should
consider is that it's a trade-off
there's a theory that's probably correct
it's the sum Tom Kirkwood's to your
theory called the disposable soma and
our bodies want to do one of two things
either want to grow really fast and
reproduce fast build up a lot of muscle
cells divide that's great in the short
run you know you'd be fertile you can
run but actually that is at the expense
of hunkering down and building a long
lasting body and then it's a trade-off
over time and so animals that grow fast
and reproduce fast like a mouse will
only have a short lifespan or as a whale
that grows slowly and reproduces slowly
will live a long time interesting so the
idea is you're you're limiting your
calories you're limiting your
carbohydrates you're limiting your
protein you're limiting your amino acids
but you're ramping up on all these
beneficial molecules right these these
pathways that have evolved since the
beginning of life to make us live longer
during adversity so we can thrive when
times come back that's good do you take
into consideration quality of life
versus length of life like is there a
like a sweet spot yeah that well it's
hard to ask the mice how they feel but
they we do test them and we do frailty
studies and we can see that they've got
better memory and they can run further
on a treadmill they're stronger those
kind of things they see better and you
know we think that that probably means
they're happier as well and when you're
taking in protein so if you're not
eating mammals are you eating a lot of
fish yeah fish is fine white meat I
indulge I like chicken that kind of
chickens fine not too much of it but I'm
trying to eat as many vegetables
especially the colored ones for the
reason that I said which is well a few
reasons one is that you don't ingest as
much protein as you otherwise would you
get all those vitamins because I get
those molecules from the plants that we
think make you healthy
so reservatrol just one of
a bunch of polyphenols that plants make
when they're stressed and when plants
are stressed they go colored so that the
purples and the reds and blues yeah
those are molecules that are generally
healthy and I think I'm one of the few
scientists um who thinks this but I
think that we've evolved as animals to
sense the plant world and when our food
supply is stressed out then our bodies
sense that by when we ingest them we get
these molecules like resort all and
we've evolved a sense that and we get
the benefits of longevity as a side
effect so mm-hmm
this is really fascinating to me because
the idea that you're trying to balance
out that this site the concept of a
mouse growing very quickly but dying
quickly as well versus something that
can extend and live longer and and be
more vital or have more vitality for a
longer period of time well so here's the
great thing is that now that we've we
believe we've figured out why not just
why but how this all works what are the
genes and pathways in the body that
control this we can have our cake and
eat it too we can at least in a mouse
and probably in a human in a few years
time and maybe even with these
supplements we'll see we can trick the
body into being hungry and being in
adversity even if you're eating a lot or
you're not exercising and so we can
return slowly but of it eventually
turning a mouse into more like a human
so that you even though you can grow and
reproduce quickly you still turn on
these protective pathways and live a
long time the best example is the the
nematode worm art C elegans that's been
studied a lot for longevity and the
mutations that make those worms live
sometimes - and up to ten times longer
are activating genes that are normally
only turned on when they hunker down and
turn into a little dour Tower or a stage
which means that they're they're not
really reproducing they're just
hibernating so you can have a
hibernation of benefits but still live a
normal healthy life and this is from
manipulating genes right so this all
comes from genetics so I'm a geneticist
at Harvard
and the way the breakthrough came so go
back in the 1980s it was antioxidants
mutations because people really didn't
have a handle on what was going on and
the idea that you could slow down aging
with one gene or one drug was ludicrous
because it's so complicated but now we
know from genetic studies is that you
can find mutations hundreds of them
actually in organisms that lengthen
lifespan so it's not as complicated as
we thought
what about mile statin inhibitors and
the studies that they've done with my so
they turned them on and off and they've
grown those super mice yeah Hulk mice
well being a Hulk doesn't mean you'll
live longer right didn't they live
longer though I don't know did that I
believe they did I think that was one of
the weird side effects well if you allow
me to speculate as to why that might
have happened is so being bulky is good
let's finally I'm correct first yeah
well one of the things if both he is
good
bulky will increase your metabolism
it'll get rid of the fat and the fat is
a real problem because fried that will
make you inflamed being fat is one of
the worse things you can do just fat
shamed I did were very very upset at you
right now well build up muscle as well
some people are overweight and have a
lot of muscle and they're a lot better
off when you you teach classes I assume
I teach at Harvard yeah and when you say
that fat is bad do you get a new
reaction over the last couple years or
do you do you find a way around saying
it like that gen generally get okay
comments on my lectures but I wasn't
saying fat people a bad or saying having
found in your Vice cells a bad right
okay like were you saying so you're
breaking it down to cells you're not
picking on anybody yeah
here at myostatin insufficiency produces
15% life extension in mice so yeah so
those mile statin inhibitors make the
mice grow longer so you think that might
have had an effect by virtue of the fact
they're more bulky and they have more
muscle tissue and they burn off more fat
that's one theory the other thing would
be that some muscles are secreting
molecules called Maya cons into the
bloodstream and we don't know what they
all are but when you exercise you do
release some of these and they may also
be contributing because muscles are
signaling to the whole body
when you go for a run it's not that your
muscles get an exercise your everything
in your body gets an exercise by these
communication molecules hmm and that's
why if you fuse an old mouse to a young
mouse you can have these benefits that
the young Mouse imparts on the old and
actually negatively vice versa so when
you say fuse you mean by taking the
blood of the old mouse and putting into
the young right but what we what we
actually do because that's too hard
you don't need humans but in mice what
you do is you sew the skin together so
that the blood flows between them yeah
it's it's not so pleasant but they they
don't seem to be too badly affected once
they learn how to walk in sync now by
the way to all your listeners we don't
do those experiments in my lab but when
I say we I mean yes to the scientific
community as a whole your thoughts on if
you have any about these startups that
are actually taking the blood of young
people and in injecting it into the
bodies of older folks so I don't think
there's a scientific reason to say it
won't work and the scientists are
involved are some my great colleagues
very smart people you ever done it no
that's a bit extreme for me but I think
it could work right it's just a little
bit out there for me
but what they're going to do what
they're doing actually is treating
people with neurological disorders a lot
of these startups
you know I'm involved in probably 15
startups right now what we're trying to
do is to treat diseases of aging and
even rare childhood diseases because you
can't treat it aging as a business model
there is no disease called aging yet
right but anyway getting back to the
science I think that it's based on sold
science but the future is is I think a
better way to go about this is to find
what the actual molecules are in the
blood and just make those don't give the
whole kit and caboodle
yeah when you've said this twice you
think aging is a disease or maybe
perhaps should be treated as disease are
classified
oh absolutely think aging should be
classified as a disease we should think
of it as a disease I know why why
shouldn't we everything else that goes
on in the body over time that's bad for
us is considered a disease do you know
why aging isn't can
disease because it happens to everybody
exactly mmm that's the only reason well
it happens to most people 90% of people
in developed but why is that a reason to
say oh it's natural we should just deal
with it we used to say there about
cancer and we used to say it about dying
for an infection when you say it happens
to 90% of the people in the developed
world what happens the other ten they
die
hey pipe boss I guess okay I see what
you're saying so they die young yeah
okay just clarifying yeah I agree I mean
it's been disi it's it's it's a problem
right aging is a problem I saw an old
gentleman yesterday and it was painful
just to watch this poor guy walk you
know hunched over and just struggling to
move at an incredibly slow pace that
seems like a person with a disease well
it is and imagine if we were on a planet
NOW oh you know an island where
everybody leaves 300 years and we'd show
up and you and I in our you know midlife
we're starting to look old already
they're gonna look at us and say what is
wrong with you guys we need to treat you
emergent Lee we need to call this a new
type of syndrome right and it's only
because we all tend to go through this
that we think it's acceptable but I
would argue it's the biggest threat to
the healthcare system is the biggest
threat to the world's economy actually
is the inability of us to treat people
in their old age and keep them healthy
mm-hmm now some people look at it a
different way and their consideration is
that there's an overpopulation problem
as it is and folks like you want to want
to walk around living to be 300 years
old have a gang kids you could create a
mess all right well I have three kids
but that's enough that's more than I was
going to have but yeah it we do that you
have to do the math though how much
would the population grow and we I'm
actually working with a number of people
to try and calculate this number of
economists in London that we're working
on so this is this is really a problem
I agree with you that if this comes and
I would actually say when this comes
when this comes is it I mean it's coming
there's there's dozens of companies
working on drugs
the sciences here so let's say it's
coming anyway so we have to deal with
this how are we going to deal with it
well let's first of all understand what
the future looks like
we can't look backwards alright because
no one's ever invented this stuff before
so we have to look forwards what's the
world look like in terms of population
it's not as bad as you might think if
you stopped aging today and everybody
just went on forever the population
growth rate would be less than the rate
of immigration now that's not I can't go
on forever of course but what we find is
as people healthier especially in
developing nations they have fewer kids
so the calculation shows that it would
eventually taper off so human population
will taper off about nine to ten billion
people and then stay there and that
population will be the happiest
healthiest people in the world know why
they predict that because I was having
this conversation with someone the other
day that as people become more affluent
and society becomes more urban people
will have less and less children and the
population will stabilize is that the
theory behind this right well actually
education is a major part of it just
watch yeah women's education is the main
thing but also just being healthy or
lifts the the wealth of a nation and by
women's education do you mean extended
education so that they pursue careers is
that the idea or is it I mean obviously
most people understand how babies are
made like where where's the education
contributing to a lower population well
so my understanding is that the first
thing you do if you if you educate young
women is that they can make choices for
themselves and they're not just
subjugated you know most men would like
to have more so right so you're thinking
of like third world and write the real
developing world but that's where the
population is a real problem in Europe
they actually are struggling to keep up
with their population you know what
they've got a an ageing tsunami so to
speak same with Japan the average farmer
in Japan is 65 years old they got a real
problem
China's about to head that way too and
that's gonna drag the economy of the
planet down and it's commit a real
problem we gonna waste so much money on
keeping older people alive for the last
10 20 years of their life with dementia
frailty that could be trillions of
dollars just fifty trillion dollars just
in
country alone that could be spent on
figuring out how to solve global warming
better education the environment
saving the the one third species that
are becoming threatened that that's why
I think tackling aging isn't a selfish
act it's probably the most generous tax
act that I could give the planet that's
an interesting way of looking at it what
populations as a whole you know when you
look at the world what where are the
people living the longest and why well
it's debatable there are these blue
zones I think many of your listeners
will have heard about those but there
are pockets that have great genes but
they also have great diets and
lifestyles and so the the best one that
I'm familiar with is the island of
Okinawa in Japan and and by the way I
used to follow the Okinawa diet a couple
of my good friends wrote a book about it
so I was on tofu and some fish felt
really great couldn't keep it up but
those one can you keep it up I had kids
and our meals turned into pizzas and
hosta yeah unfortunately but I'm getting
back there now that my kids are
teenagers but the Okinawans they live
into their hundreds fairly frequently
it's not one in a million it's it's more
like one and I think a hundred thousand
or something so it's ten times higher
they they work most of their lives
they're physically active they fast a
lot and they have a lot of green leafy
vegetables and that seems to be the
secret and there's a there were they
were selling something was something
about their mineral rich diet they
remember they were selling it was like a
big thing for awhile coral calcium and
they were using that as an example of
why the Okinawans we're living so long
do you remember that I do remember ad
yeah but in scientific circles we
weren't really bothered with it
yeah like there's calcium is calcium
right yeah I didn't I don't know about
it better calcium from coral or
something I might even be wrong about
that but I just remember reading about
the Okinawan sand that the speculation
they seaweed as well right
very healthy probably the best thing
that they do is they don't overeat mmm
stop at seventy percent
yeah I'm a glutton that's my number one
problem I just love to eat yeah yeah me
too I keep going once I'm in it I just
want to just keep shoving it in my face
but I've done a good job over the last
few years of tapering that off and the
intermittent fast and I think is
probably one of the best things I've
ever done in terms of you know just
maintaining energy levels maintaining
body weight that kind of stuff yeah
yeah you look good so I think that
that's one of the best things that
people can do what we've known for
seventy or more years actually is if you
calorie restrict animals actually even
heat cells and ones they live longer and
this is the most robust way to to
prevent cancer heart disease Alzheimer's
in a mouse and so the intermittent
fasting is just a way of mimicking this
calorie restricted diet so what what is
calorie restriction it's reducing what
you would your doctor would recommend
for your body but reducing it back to
about twenty to thirty percent so it's
quite extreme that's not pleasant I
tried that for a week gave up too hard
but intermittent fasting like yourself
it's doable it's not always pleasant but
I think that's the best way to do it and
with the mice it works just as well as
calorie restriction which is pretty much
always being a bit hungry now one of the
things are you looking at in terms of
mitigating stress or like what other
factors are there that you have to keep
an eye on yeah stress is a bad one I try
to take life in my stride not get too
worried about it remember what's
important so my heart rate rarely goes
up even under a really extreme
circumstances and that that's about it I
try to balance my life as best I can I
don't go through airport scanners as
much as I can and have x-rays these
little things do you think those are bad
for you those are the new ones aren't
they like a radio wave yeah they're
they're millimeter radio waves I don't
want to taking chances and also don't
want to freak people out but the
old-style ones that were banned in
Europe first they've they were
potentially damaging x-rays definitely
try not to have as many as you can but
flying is just as bad as an x-ray well
that's the problem I was going to a
scanner and
I said I don't want to go through the
scanner and they got quite upset because
it's a bother but they said you know
it's just as much damage to your body as
the flight and so I said why do I want
to double it anyway so I go through
scanners but I try not to but let me
tell you why I think it's so bad because
scanners are going to change what we
call the epigenome now a lot of people
haven't heard of the epigenome the
genome everybody knows it's your DNA the
code of life the epigenome is what
regulates and reads those genes at the
right time okay and so we've we knew
about DNA we know how to read the genome
pretty easily we can do that now on a
mars bar sized device in a day the
epigenome is quite difficult different
the epigenome is that the structure of
how the DNA is looped around if you look
at the chromosome you're not seeing the
genome you'll really basically seeing
epigenome and what what I think is
causing aging is not that you're losing
the DNA structure
you're not having mutations you're
actually changing the epigenome which is
the the reader of the genes so put
another way compact disc okay for the
young audience compact discs are little
things we used to put music on but
anyway these are these are digital
information of course and the reason we
switch to digital in the first place is
that it's very copyable and it doesn't
wear out or as a cassette tape you know
people our age know that if you try to
copy that a thousand times there's not
much left at the end so the the compact
disc information is the genome the
epigenome is the reader of the CD that
little laser that goes around and what I
think is causing aging is not the loss
of the digital information but it's the
reader at the analog part and that's
like a cassette tape that eventually
runs out what we what's going on really
is that your cells are losing the
ability to read the right genes the way
they did when you were 20 and that's
basically
noise informational noise that gathers
over time and so what we end up with
when we're 80 is a compact disc or DVD
that's scratched so the reader cannot
read the right genes or
time and the cells become dysfunctional
now what we're working on is how do you
polish that CD or that DVD to get that
information back again and if you can do
that I think that's really the best way
to reset your age and I we haven't
published it yet but we're working on
ways to actually reset that genome and
actually get back the information that
we once had when we were 20 so what is
happening to the epigenome when you're
going through those scanners well so
what we found is the biggest trap door
of the epigenome is a a broken
chromosome DNA break and I don't know
about scanners that's just a abundance
of caution but an x-ray will damage your
DNA no question even going out in the
Sun will do a bit of that and we think
that the cells reaction to that break
having to unwrap the DNA from its
chromatin we call it and up and then
rewrap it is what eventually disrupts
the ability to read the right gene at
the right place so DNA damage is
essentially a little scratch on on the
DVD and that accumulates over time so
being out in the Sun does that but being
out in the Sun also is beneficial your
body produces more vitamin D yeah weld
it so there's also a theory called
antagonistic pleiotropy which is what's
good for you when you're young comes
back to bite you when you're old so you
might look good and feel good and get
vitamin D when you're young but the
accumulation of these scratches on the
epigenome ends up you know I'm formerly
an Australian originally in Australia
now American an Australian I grew up in
the stratum son and I can tell you that
you know most Australians look older
than they should know Lausanne no ozone
and lack of sunscreen in the 1970s why
do you guys have a whole Nils on over
Australia what's all about what you do
know it's what what did the world -
chlorophyll oh sure
well hairspray why does it accumulate
over Australia's or it started in
Antarctica and so ozone will i've been
convenient nobody's up there leave it up
there yeah well if we need to please
leave it below it that way yeah well
yeah that the the ozone layer is fairly
important if you don't want to get
singed by UV light
yeah well that's one of the first things
I noticed when I went to Australia was
there's all these Sun cancer warnings
skin cancer warnings everywhere
well a third of Australians get some
form of kiss skin cancers that's crazy
yeah but what's also gonna happen is
it'll disrupt your epigenome over time
and you'll look old but if you have an
x-ray you're gonna damage your organs
you're gonna accelerate aging I believe
in your body and it happened you can't
avoid double strand breaks broken
chromosomes happens all the time there's
trillions of cells in your body and it's
happening all the time
so living is a problem okay flying
flying is even worse but we working on
is how do you get back that original
information into the cell and make a
cell not just believe that it's 20 again
but actually be 20 mmm so what do you do
we reprogram them there are a set of
genes that we we and others have found
three main ones that when you put them
into a cell or even into a mouse they
become younger again whoa how far do you
think you are from implementing this on
human beings well so theoretically you
do it to yourself you could you could do
it to yourself
theoretically I would I wouldn't do that
cuz I'm not crazy we need to figure out
the safety I don't want to become a
giant tumor well we just use it on bad
people uh yeah well I think people know
to throw tournament ooh 18 year olds and
go whoa yeah well yeah that that would
be for someone else someone else well
hopefully no one would ever do that why
not
well what kill them is what we're doing
I agree with you that we want it we want
to see what happens in your hands you
just give them like free pizza or
something they're on death row right if
you're there already murderers you want
to be the first one to me come on my
live death row and I want to go on to
death row but I'm saying if you're gonna
kill somebody like wouldn't be a good
idea to like oh hey we'll give you four
hours of TV a day so we want to shoot
you up with some stuff it's gonna make
you younger if I was on death row I'd go
do it
see what's up I don't watch TV well what
we do is uh so we give it to old mice
and we check it what happens to their
body so nursery
people do it to them right well tell you
what I wouldn't force anyone but if
somebody was blind or almost blind yeah
and he now studies we're recovering
eyesight really yeah
what about two damaged eyes yeah really
yeah so I don't want to freak out
because I know a guy who's got a
significantly damaged eye from fighting
well I can tell you what we've done and
this is what we're riding up for
publication now we've done a few things
three things to the mice one is we've
pinched their optic nerve and crushed it
which was a test for growing neurons in
AI and we find it with our reprogramming
we can make the nerves be just like a
newborn baby
they grow back and then we also tested
on glaucoma pressure in the eye we
increased pressure in the mouse's eye
and they lose their large litre eyesight
and we can recover that and then we also
a test old mice that don't see very well
and we also seem to improve their
eyesight almost back to normal
so what I I don't think we'll be going
to nursing homes anytime soon but what
we are doing is running a clinical trial
on this and so we're looking to do that
in early 2020 and the clinical trial
will be on people with glaucoma or
various eye issues the plan is glaucoma
first but it could work for other
damaged retinas as well even broken
spinal cords what we're thinking of
trying Wow and that's just one part of
the body imagine what it could
potentially do to the rest of us do you
feel incredibly fortunate to be living
in this century I do every day but I
would love to live next century because
it's gonna yeah but your what's cool is
you're kind of at the tip of the spear
pushing this stuff right now like you
you're gonna be one of the guys that
gets to see the stuff get implemented
from your actual own research where it
didn't exist before
yeah that's pretty damn cool better than
like living 100 years from now where you
just take it for granted like a trust
fund kid you know yeah but just imagine
what you can do in a hundred years you
can write well maybe you'll be here
we're all on the yeah you might be 150
we'll see yeah I think there's a chance
someone will be well it's it's a good
chance you're gonna be
I mean you're the one who's gonna know
well so he's my philosophy I'm not gonna
let anyone try technology until I've
tried it first really so I was taking an
Iranian pause because you're you're
currently doing something like that I'm
not doing the three programming yet
that's a little dangerous but the others
I've always wanted to know first
my eyesight is starting to go cuz I'm 51
now and like when I'm like if I had to
read this book I got a NIC Christakis
this book if I'm sitting here reading
this book if I don't have reading
glasses on I got to do this it's a bit
of a struggle gonna be able to fix that
so potentially in the mice we can you
can we well I don't we don't give them
books to read but their eyesight
improves we can test that how do you do
it there's a moving screen no I don't
mean how do you oh how do you know how
do you test or not not how you test
rather how do you improve their eyesight
we've we put these reprogramming genes
into a virus which is already used to
treat genetic diseases in the eye and we
inject it straight into the mouse's
eyeball this sounds like the beginning
of a horror movie
yeah I think it's actually or an awesome
movie it's the awesome part that I'm so
pissed on well if you're going blind
right one injection from your doctor and
then you take an antibiotic to turn the
genes on for as long as you need and you
get your eyesight back that's not
horrific at all that's a pretty
incredible how far away do you think you
are doing that to humans
well 2020 will be the first safety study
we hope yeah but the crazy stuff the
future is if this all goes well you have
an injection in your vein let's say when
you're 30 and then those viruses infect
your body and they sit there dormant
until you need them so when might you
need them you might have a car accident
turn them on you can turn them on with
just a an antibiotic in a drip or in a
pill or you start to lose your eyesight
take it take an antibiotic so you put
them in your body almost as an insurance
policy and then you have the option to
turn them on in the future
exactly Wow it's what we do in the mice
now with every action we assume there's
some
negative consequence or potentially
negative consequence right we always
assume that but it's not always right
mm-hmm so it with the molecules that
we've been testing for years now like in
oh man we haven't seen any downside just
longer endurance and protection so there
isn't always a downside to these things
in fact if you just think n MN is
replacing a molecule that we lose over
time as we get older it's just becoming
you know it's a fairly natural process
no downside exercising and dieting
either right of course and you said you
run once a week is that what you you and
you do do you lift weights as well right
and when you do it do try to not go too
hard and burn yourself out too much do
you have a sweet spot yeah I do I do I
try not to go too much all right that
that's the trick with everything in life
mm-hmm it's this so hormesis effect to
get your body damaged enough that it can
repair itself but give you the benefits
without like having a lot of x-rays or
radiation we're out doing it and
scratching that CD yeah that's always my
thought on people that do extreme
endurance activities like ultra
marathons and things on those lines I
mean I marvel at their willpower and
their ability to push themselves through
that and the the physical condition they
have to be in to perform such feats but
I always think man you're probably doing
x times the amount of damage to your
body that a normal person does at your
age it sounds right calorie restriction
works but if you overdo it you also
starve you yeah you die so you got to
find the right balance right how do you
how do you know what the right balance
is for you good question how does
anybody so we live in an age that is
still fairly primitive this is why I
like the future these days we go to the
doctor most of us go to the doctor for
annual physical which is ludicrous the
idea that your doctor will take a
hopefully a blood test or prostate exam
once a year that's kind of crazy what
happens if you've got a tumor that
developed the day you leave the doctor's
office so the future and actually
partially for those who are on the
cutting edge
can be done right now it's monitoring
your body in various ways genetically
epigenetically we can measure those
scratches right now and also with blood
tests you can also have companies tell
you if you're out of range if you're not
optimized and how to get it back in
order so that's what I do so how often
do you monitor your blood probably every
few months I have a blood test from a
company that tells me what I need to
correct and how extensive it is is this
blood test like is it a standard one
that a normal person can get or do you
have to have a prescription to get this
or no you can go online and get it it's
about I think forty parameters they
measure some that are not standard that
your doctor wouldn't do some are pretty
standard but what's nice is it's it's a
tracking system it's called insight
tracker and they you can see over time
if things are going up and even if
they're not out of range yet you can see
if they headed that direction and
correct it before it's too late
so that's why one of the reasons I'm on
metformin my blood glucose was going up
and up and up which predicts lower life
and some metformin got it back down to
where it was optimal again so that's one
of the things in metformin does is it
lowers your blood glucose that's what
it's prescribed for for diabetics mmm
now does that have any effect on your
energy levels I don't think so I haven't
noticed that hmm where you would notice
it is during rigorous exercise that
makes sense do you feel it uh well so I
take med Forman at night so that maybe
probably the best thing right so when
you're sleeping it's having its effect
and it's run its course by the time you
wake up you play yeah hmm now when you
you are exercising are you exercising
fasted or do you take certain amount of
carbohydrates before you do any kind of
physical exercise so I start the gym to
2 p.m. on a Sunday and I'll have a salad
wrap or something like that so I'm not
feeling hungry during it and one pass
out huh and so I understand you're
getting these blood tests but do you
have a trainer do you do set a workout
or you structure it I do now just
recently go to trainer
it's great thing to do with your son
father sometime so yeah that we have an
hour of trainer and then we we also do a
bit of boxing and the mix it up you're
beating your song up yeah it's fun it's
legal I think go to the sauna and that's
just the best way to spend a day that is
a nice way to spend day so how many days
a week you doing this so you do give
yourself days off do you you schedule
that well it so once a day of that I
once a week on Sunday enjoying the week
if I have a chance and I'm not traveling
I go to the home gym and when you say
you run once a week is that by design
that you only give yourself once a week
I probably run two times a week a high
intensity if I could and I try to do
that often I'm on a plane or hmm right
and we say high intensity are you
sprinting doing track work like what
kind of stuff yeah so I'm not an expert
so what I do is I I will enter hop spend
a half an hour on one of those
treadmills that you shaped mm-hmm yeah
yeah great they are so that you
determine your speed so I'll sprint and
then I'll slow down and sprint slow down
they're actually more difficult than
running on the flat surface
it's where regular treadmills is
actually easier than running because the
treadmill is moving you just kind of
lifting your legs up and keeping moving
with this actually you're powering it so
by you pushing on it it's actually more
it's like running I forget what the
degree incline is but it's like an X X
amount per centage harder than a regular
run oh good well that's what feels good
to me and what although it's a little
bit scary if you're not used to these
treadmills you can run off the front
because they're free-flowing go it right
off the tip they have handles oh yeah
you're a genius you're not gonna go
flying off the treadmill again dummy I'm
no genius especially when it comes to
sport well yeah yeah I'm a big fan of
those things and it's nice too because
there's a lot of give to them there's
not much pounding when you run on those
it's not like running on hard surface
yeah so I tried to go easy on my joints
I've seen you've probably all seen
sports players with all sorts of damage
to joints and I've done all of it you
know
yeah so yet low-impact high intensity
hmm and as far as weight lifting what
kind of stuff you do in there cuz weight
lifting does have a beneficial effect on
bone density and it's supposedly has an
effect on anti-aging as well yeah
absolutely believe in that and so I try
to maintain some muscle mass it's good
for burning fat too so you know I try to
do not go overboard with the bench
presses otherwise I'll have even more
rounded shoulders estrella get the
straight back so the trainer is helping
me bring my body back into shape
you took one look at me and he said you
you you did this unsupervised yeah you
wrecked your body in your 20s let's try
to fix that what did he say you were
doing wrong I said well why would you do
an exercise on a part of your body you
can't see in the mirror oh you're back
up my back is is flimsy and it's all it
all here so I said like you're a smart
man it's protecting your spine you but I
love bench pressing Oh God at least I
used to
sorry I'm one of your shoulders out too
though right oh yeah yeah especially if
you do it heavy now you do this how many
days a week hopefully two or three two
or three a week so all everything you're
doing you would essentially recommend to
others as well right so do you think
that's a good plan two to three days a
week of weightlifting one to two days a
week of running well honor when you can
yeah so I I'd never used the would
recommend gets me into trouble yeah good
move I just say what I do when people
can judge but outsmart but the science
does say this is the optimal and that's
why I've chosen it for myself but I
think without monitoring yourself it's
easy to overdo it and also you just
really don't know what's going on in the
inside it's crazy to think we know more
about our cars as we drive on the
dashboard than we do about our bodies
how does anybody know if the exercise is
too much too little or if that
supplements doing anything right with
that that is a big problem right I mean
one of the things that we have a giant
problem in MMA is tainted supplements
people buying supplements the
supplements have other things in them
and what are you drinking do you drink
mostly water to consume caffeine
so with any man which gives me a boost I
think
caffeine's a little too intense really I
find that so I'll have a cup of coffee
in the morning but that's it one one a
day yeah Wow yeah just two kicks I don't
live it's hard it's really hard right
when you're doing research all the time
don't you need a little boost sometimes
well I do drink I cook oh oh how dare
you
I'm just ruined everything you said
you're doing that yeah it's - fucking
horrible for you is it that bad house
for teams well I actually had an
inflated idea of how bad it was
apparently but in talking to another
research scientist he was telling me
that the this the actual amount that
they gave to rats when they're you know
diagnosing them with cancer is almost
impossible for a person to consume well
so you'd have to have ungodly amounts of
aspartame in order to get these effects
that everyone's terrified of he said the
other thing to take into consideration
is look around at how many people are
drinking diet coke he goes it was really
that bad they'd be dropping like flies
the the consideration though is
upsetting your gut biome
right now that I know or at least I've
read but he said that's also probably
large quantities uh it's true but as you
know the microbiome is a finicky thing
you don't want to mess with that's the
reason I have this this yogurt in the
morning trying to research kimchi at all
yeah not regularly but yeah that's
that's what about other fermented
vegetables or anything along those lines
probiotics Japanese food I mean - but I
don't think about my diet that often mmm
usually too busy running around but now
have you ever messed around with
nootropics or anything like that to
enhance your mental clarity or boost
your brainpower what well yeah my brain
is always running a marathon that's
where I definitely noticed that if I
take time off even a weekend without
thinking I'm Dumber on Monday dumber
well yeah I just can't really so like
it's almost like you need to keep that
case going for sure right rights good I
guess I'm not a natural genius I have to
work at it but I do find that that
constant stimulation I've got to do that
to be at the peak and this is the tippy
peak this is the genetics department at
Harvard Medical School
these are no dummies these oh yeah what
are them a Nobel Prize winner is an you
got a I'm a lot of the signs we
publishes in the world's top journals
which you really get into so to be able
to think of these ideas and come up with
new things you can't just do that on you
know on a whim you really have to have a
mind that is focused and in shape
exactly yeah
so it is essentially you feel like
running like you take days off you
actually slip back a little bit and you
have to ramp back up these horrible I
really hate it but is it just because
you just get used to a lazy pace and you
have to like acclimate to get back in
the lab or is it actually you do get
dumber I don't have the memory recall I
feel like I did when I was in my 20s
which is I wasn't as sharp I'm a lot
sharper than I was then so part of it
could be the mental training that I give
myself every every day the other part
could be that the molecules that I'm
taking so in a man raising nad could
have new rhetoric effects we don't know
yeah I'm sure creatine supposedly has
nootropic effects as well do you ever
take that no caffeine certainly does I'd
like to get you some actual nootropics
I'll send you some there's a bunch of
different ones that I use I use three
different companies one that's one of
mine and to the other companies neuro
one and another one called true brain
and I find them pretty beneficial great
I could do with that yeah
it'll definitely well the one that we've
tested was alpha brain we tested the
Boston Center for memory that did a
double-blind placebo-controlled study
showed increase in verbal memory
increased reaction speed reaction time
but the the other ones piracetam of your
mess with any of those no choline you
supplement with that no interesting
right I could be smarter I guess well
this I don't think it's that it's just
it's it's not smarter I don't think
anything makes you smart
I think knowledge makes you smarter what
it does is gives you access I think to
something that's already in your head
good a little bit a little smoother good
the recall is important the other thing
as a scientist what you need is you need
to see a thousand different sets of data
and put them into one thing and see the
connections mmm
so I'm exposed to so much information
it's drinking from a firehose every day
I'm reading papers I'm talking to dozens
of people I've got dozens of companies
got two labs in the world it's just
coming in and for my brain to take it in
sorted out finds links between them
connect that person with that politician
with that person or military it's all
going on and a regular brain that isn't
trained would have a hard time yeah I
would imagine I'm so shocked that you
only drink one cup of coffee a day with
that kind of schedule well so the nmn is
good
do you take nad in an IV form no no I've
I haven't but I've talked to many people
that have I've been scheduling it or
wanting to schedule it putting it off
for weeks but I'm gonna do that soon
because I just know too many people that
have extreme benefits from it yeah it
sounds good
do you know anyone who has done it no
hmm that seems like something will be
right up your alley
yeah you'd think just be more focused on
curing aging hmm but nad does have
supposedly some sort of an effect on
Aging correct IV nad I don't know about
an IV and eighty else it's being poorly
studied actually as a lot of anecdotes
and I hear about these all the time but
I haven't seen really hardcore
double-blind placebo-controlled trials
now nad in supplemental form though in
in terms of oral orally ingested nad
well so if you give an ad to an animal
or a cell it taken up really poorly
nad is a big molecule mm-hmm n MN is a
smaller version of nad that gets into
cells quickly so that's probably a
difference so it's the same benefit but
it's easier consumed orally well I think
so I mean the we're still at the cutting
edge of figuring out what's
true and what isn't but nad is thought
to not be well absorbed in the body as
compared to these other smaller
molecules that the body then turns into
nad once it gets in how much water do
you drink not enough not enough was just
speaking with some members of tombe Tom
Brady's team and they said David you
gotta drink more Tom Brady's team
uh yeah you mean is like physical team
you know like the Patriots know his uh
his CEO of this company okay and they're
saying you need a drink anyone got to
see it's like suggestion
I'm good drinking something yeah I'm
drinking a lot more alright then you end
up just going to the bathroom off the
time but go do what you gotta do you do
you know it makes sense to me having a
buildup of toxins in your body and urea
isn't a good thing right um do you take
anything else
the is notable well I can run you
through it sure I'm on a lipid no a
statin for I understand I've been on a
statin since I was in my 20s whoa
yeah hmm that stuff's fucking terrible
for you uh right so my good friend and
colleague George church at Harvard told
me I'm killing myself but I have really
high cholesterol my family genetically
genetically yeah and does your family
have a history of heart disease because
of this yes my grandmother at least
according to her had a stroke in her 30s
and then yeah it's it's bad so I'm I'm
fighting bad Ashkenazi Jew genes here
that's crazy
see but on him since you're in your 20s
that's and you're a thin man if anybody
looked at you they would never think
that you would have an issue yeah it's
unfortunate um but I'm a doctors worst
nightmare first of all I teach them so I
know what they're like but also when I
go into the doctor's office I say here's
what we should be doing oh you should be
doing to me and I saw when in my 20s and
I said I want to go on a statin and this
is in the days when statins weren't well
studied and my doctor said but you're
not old and I said I don't want to wait
till I'm old and sick to get this
medicine I need it now and I thought the
doctor for the doctor and eventually he
prescribed it and my cholesterol came
down
I'm the same with dentists I went to the
dentist a few months ago and I said I
want my teeth fixed my two front teeth
and she said they find normal wear and
tear and I said I don't care what's
normal
fix my teeth get them back to how I was
when I was 20 no we don't do that we
don't do that well you did my daughter
right last week
yeah but she's young she's got a future
oh hell done don't be ages wrong with
your teeth are though wearing out and I
hated feeling that worn out we're a cow
you don't get that way uh just getting
shorter and flatter and what the fuck
you eatin rocks yeah I must be the
Australian diet sand in your food yeah
so I said to her I thought you were one
of the world's best dentists and she
said okay fine I'll do it but don't
blame me if it doesn't work and so she's
worse well she was worried that it might
snap off so you she's putting a cap on
you yes she's extending my two front
teeth which is normal like people get
caps all the time well it's not a cap it
so I'm actually just material stuck to
the tip right just on the tip yeah it's
and oh so like if you had a chipped
tooth they would do that instead of
replace the actual that's what they did
to my daughter yeah and I said do that
to me that looks great and she said no
no no finally she said okay but it's
your problem you got to pay for it
fine and she did it and she actually
said at the end of it this is great I
might offer this as a procedure to other
patients hmm but but my point is not
about teeth it's the medical profession
is ageist they give young people certain
treatments because they're young and
they don't give them to the old but then
they don't give the young people the
treatments that they need before they
get old yes wacky I had a similar thing
happen with a torn meniscus I have a
minor meniscus tear and the guy told me
well if you were young they would stitch
it up and hope that it would heal I'm
like what the fuck does that mean I go
everything works good like what is
difference what is the difference
between me and a younger body and he
said something about blood flow you have
more blood flow I said look I'm not a
doctor but that doesn't make any sense
I go I'm working out all the time
there's a lot of blood going through
there like
what the fuck is happening and I'm like
let's just shoot some stem cells in
there and see what's up because they
wanted to do meniscus you know and what
is it - copy whatever they call it when
they cut some of the meniscus out I'm
like yeah let's just let's just try it
it's totally working like I don't have
any pain in it now so um I think there's
a weird thing that they do do when you
get to a certain age like yeah like I
have a friend it was a torn ACL and they
essentially he's in his 50s like little
late 50s and they essentially told him
not to fix it I go hey fucker get it
fixed we crazy and I have a wobbly knee
and they're like well he told me if I
was younger I fuck that doctor go get
that thing fixed
he's like well how the recovery time
like shut up you just recover you just
alive a year goes by it's fixed just
stop just go get it fixed yeah see
that's the problem with today's society
because we think a 50 year old is is
okay oh that's dead that's BS 50 is
still very young actually there are 78
seven-year-old 80 year olds even now
you're all still playing tennis yeah
loving life that's that's just the
beginning of what's coming if you
maintain activity that seems to be the
key the the really hard thing is once
someone's in their 50s and they want to
get in shape now and they haven't been
active their whole life that seems to be
a problem there their DVD is scratched
up yes hard to go back it can be done
though I did see a guy who was 58 years
old who started running marathons at 58
in his 70s he's running sub three-hour
marathons and he looks great so it just
he just had to take his time and really
be dedicated and watch his diet
nutrition and next thing you know this
guy's an elite marathon runner it is
doable what we find in the lab is if we
treat my Serle in life it gives them the
battle much better lifespan it's sure so
don't ever leave it too late well you
see that with athletes like athletes
that were fit when they were young and
never lost it really maintained and
stayed in the gym and stayed active you
see them in their 50s and even their 60s
looking great whereas you know it's just
once your body deteriorates it's very
difficult to bring it back but if you
maintain it it seems like there's people
today that are doing that it's much more
common if you go to a gym for instance
go to a nice gym you'll see a lot of
folks that are in their 60s and 70s that
are really active and they're there all
the time and the regulars have the gym
and they look great they do somewhat my
father is a is a prime example of that
so he's in Australia and he's been
taking care of his body since he was in
his early 40s probably a little too late
but still he's been taking cementum and
it's metformin for a while resveratrol
but he's been active that's the key I
think and then so that combination so
he's now just turning 80 this year you
would think that he's 30 if you if you
didn't know his age and he's running
around my mother passed away from cancer
so he's dating women he's out every
night he's traveling the world now this
is the future for for people in their
80s he started a new career at 80 it was
at 76 what's he doing he got bored to
retire at 67 thought he had another ten
years of good life and he kept going and
going going his friends are getting
frail he's still active so he went back
and he's working at Sydney University on
the ethics panel for clinical trials and
other studies and that's what you want
older people with wisdom and knowledge
to do to get back that sounds good too
like for you you get your dad hopped up
on all these awesome new drugs then you
get them working on the ethics panel for
clinical studies and then you get them
to give you some death row patients so
you can try it on right you're on to me
yes I know what you're doing now man you
wiggle in the system a little bit will
you keep it in the family
hyperactive super healthy dad right well
I don't recommend anything even to my
family but they end up demanding it my
brother was somebody upset that we
weren't giving him any well it seems
like it's working out really well for
your father
I mean sodium metformin the NMM and what
else is he taking he's also on a statin
and he exercises that's the main so he's
on a statin as well because he has the
same predisposed condition you know
right that's an awful condition man that
mean one of the things that I was talked
to my doctor about he's saying that that
there are people that just have high
blood pressure or higher you know higher
blood pressure or higher instances of
heart disease in their family and it's
just a really unfortunate genetic issue
it is it is but fortunately we were able
to tackle heart disease pretty well
yeah these days with blood pressure
drugs and cholesterol drugs you know
there were some side effects no question
but what we're talking about with these
longevity drugs that are in development
is that sure you can be prescribed this
medicine for your Alzheimer's or if your
liver disease but as a side effect it'll
keep the rest of your body healthy as
well protect you against cancer and all
these other things
that's what's so radical about what
we're doing hmm now what about CRISPR
and what do you think is going to come
out of that in terms of like real-world
application for an adult I mean what if
people don't know what Chris Perez
please explain it in layman's terms
yeah so CRISPR is a term actually was
invented in my department partly so I
know it pretty well it's back bacteria
have an immune system that cuts invaders
because their DNA and what we've done
now as scientists we've now utilized
that system take it out back to you and
we use it to create designer mutations
designer gene changes in animals and
also in humans so it's a bacterial
immune system that corrects genes and we
use it all time now it's um it's it's
actually what's interesting about being
able to mutate genes for many years but
this is dial up a gene mutation you can
choose exactly where you want to make it
and so I think many of you Lister's will
know that recently late last year
Chinese researcher in our field came out
and said he's engineered a couple of
twin girls with CRISPR to be resistant
to HIV the AIDS virus Wow um if they're
telling you that you got to think
they're doing some stuff they're not
telling you about right well yet have
some
with giant heads and well it's coming
through walls
yeah and well yeah if you start to see
people that are 90 and and they're still
as young as 20 you know something's
going on yeah that's the weird one right
if you can you go hey what are you doing
nothing
just eating healthy looking good take
care of box all right we're not gonna
tell you yeah yeah well so consider this
that that so the chance of getting HIV
in China is one in a thousand
so that doctor was seemingly he thought
he was ethical protecting the babies
from something that's I would say really
rare right whereas if you really wanted
to do something helpful to those kids
and we agreed it was it was something
you should do why not make them
resistant to heart disease or to cancer
right we can do that it was weird that
he chose HIV is the first test why do
you think they did that
um I think because that it was a very
well understood mutation that would if
you just destroyed the gene it would
work or as with these other diseases you
have to be much more precise but the
reason that we scientists got really
upset was that he did it in secrecy and
then just launched it on the world and
that kind of thing because that it's a
fine line in ethics you want to be doing
that with total transparency I mean I
think he was hoping to become win a
Nobel Prize or be a star and it
backfired on him because he just did it
in secrecy it backfired in the
scientific community absolutely in the
in the real world in the media I was
shocked how little discussion there was
if this news came out in the 2000s
during the Bush era
it would have been panels investigations
that would have been in news for months
but it wasn't people went what's next on
Twitter do you think it's just because
the news cycles so insane I do yeah when
you have a scientific experiment of that
nature what's the standard protocol for
a scientist whether it is or is it the
same in China and in Russia and the
United States as a scientific community
almost operate under different like a
different set of rules and anything else
you mean between countries yes I mean
you know like
obviously technologies not shared like
China is doing something technologically
the United States is they we have to
speculate we have to figure it out but
when it comes to medical science
right is it sort of an open book because
everybody sharing information I know or
at least alerting everyone to what
they're working on well I know you're
going with this at least I think I do
yeah
yes I I advise governments around the
world about what's going on under the
radar is my best I know and there are
countries I'm not gonna name them that
are doing research under the radar and
are preventing people like myself from
entering those buildings to have a look
what's going on yeah so I'm sure that
what's going on in there is actually a
little bit broader you know we hear
about but I don't know how long is it
before just say Russia no I didn't say
Russia I didn't say anything no country
I want to be able to travel I really a
Russia but I said it but in in in
countries where there are different
standards what's stopping them others
who wants to prevent their child from
having heart disease which could kill
their child you know 40% chance versus
one in a thousand and eventually you
could make a child that could live 200
years once we know how to do it that
could be the future there's always a
concern that someone is doing something
that is beneficial in one way but
negative in another way and if everyone
doesn't get to examine the research it's
very difficult like if we wanted in the
United States wanted to do something
similar to what they're doing over there
we would want to have access to what
they've learned right we would and so
generally scientists share information
right but there are companies that are
government-owned that are very secret
right or even private organizations and
that's where it's a little tricky and
that's why we we scientists get really
upset when companies or organizations
don't share information especially on
something that's critical right and
what's not really stated but it's my
belief is that one of the reasons there
was such a backlash
this crisper design a baby experiment
and it really was an experiment it's not
just that it was potentially dangerous
and you could end up with kids but have
deformities but also that unless we do
this in a in a measured manner under
supervision there's there could be a
backlash like there was against
stem-cell research you know in the 2000s
we don't want that again we want to be
able to do this the right way this time
right is it particularly if something
goes wrong with those children
one person could ruin it for millions of
right if they jumped the gun and yeah so
this we're on the second generation of
crispers are correct in terms of the
editing tools they've become more they
have that there's there's surprisingly
that there's a lot of different bacteria
that have these systems so we're getting
new ones all the time some that are more
accurate because you don't want what we
call off target effect you don't want to
accidentally mutate some gene that's
required for head development and so
yeah well I think in my department we're
on fourth generation fourth generation
yeah Wow yeah see I'm just going by
Radiolab podcasts yeah so my departments
a fun fun department to be in imagine
they are in the ending all sorts of
stuff what did you ever see the
documentary Icarus oh yeah rings a bell
it's Brian Fogle's documentary on the
Russian doping program state-sponsored
doping program and Sochi the Sochi
Olympics and how they this incredibly
complicated system of stealing the urine
and putting it through a hole in the
wall and putting fake your and back
through it was really really amazing
amazing amazing documentary but details
this incredibly complicated
state-sponsored doping system I would
imagine that with something like CRISPR
or some various new forms of genetic
editing that that's one of the things
that they're going to be looking into
things that are going to enhance
athletic performance yeah you might need
to have a DNA test to see if you've put
one of these viruses in your right why
you 50 and now you're running like a 20
year old right so that's all possible
you know that the I also write reports
for for governments and one of the
things that I predicted 15 within the
next 15 years was CRISPR being used to
engineer the human genome and make a
baby I didn't realize it was gonna
happen within one year well a lot of
these technologies that I'm trying to
predict happen way faster than even I
think it gonna happen do you think it's
possibly happened in other circumstances
that they're not going public with it's
always possible there may be some human
clones running around right now that we
don't know about do you think so it's
certainly doable scientifically there
might be some rogue nation who's doing
it
barbra streisand's talks or we're pretty
easy to clone yeah she had her dogs
cloned right yeah yeah Sammy the
fourteen-year-old dog is now there's two
of them oh Jesus Christ it that is so
weird that because I'd be so scared I'd
go to sleep and wake up that thing would
be hovering over my face with red
glowing eyes yeah wait till you have
design a cemetery what what a friend of
mine comes put some on Tate Stanford
we're entertaining the idea of making
dogs live longer genetically so why
would you want your family member to
only live yeah 12 years I think about
that man my dog is only 2 and he's such
a sweetie
you know I'm sad that one day I mean I
had to put my other dog down recently
and who's 13 and just really who's a
mastiff too and he was struggling and I
just think man this two-year-old one day
he's gonna be in that same sort of
situation well it is and so we have
three dogs my wife runs a therapy dog
okay Barbra Streisand had a beloved dog
Samantha cloned that crazy bitch look at
her
two copies of one dog Jesus Christ
that's so strange how about just get a
new dog you fucking nut well so it some
we might be nuts in my household because
we're giving out dogs in a man oh and
how's it doing how old's the dog so good
what the oldest dog is nine and he's
still doing fine Oh does he look
different
uh my wife says so these are anecdotes
I'm not gonna publish them but
so Alice's a therapy dog and he has to
go to hospitals and nursing homes and if
he has any men according to my wife he
can't be a therapy dog because he's too
excited he's running around jumping
around really so that that's anecdotal
but that seems to fit with what others
have experienced too
Wow yes we're hoping to have some
treatments for some pets shortly one of
the companies that I'm working with
treatments for pets yeah well you got to
think hey man dogs going to live 13
years anyway you know well yeah and also
we have a dog that has a kidney defect
and the vet says it's only gonna live
five years so she's three now so that's
the one you're experimenting on well we
experiment on on it on all of them but
um but what's the downside that's gotta
be so uncomfortable for some people
listen just right now I don't know how
to feel about that right what is the
downside if your dog has got a kidney
defect and it's only gonna probably live
to be nine meanwhile that dogs gonna
live to be a thousand years old well
let's say I'll come back like you know
be in the lotus position meditating 100
years from now what do you do if it
starts talking to you that'd be great
yeah what what do you do if you turn a
dog into some new kind of thing that
lives thirty or forty years what do you
tell people like if your dog like right
now you're talking about on the podcast
and a bunch of people are probably gonna
remember but a lot of people forget but
if like 15 20 years from now your dogs
still chasing balls and we're gonna come
over your house hey Dave what the fuck's
going on with your dog man right stop
the same dog that's Charlie yeah
how come Charlie doesn't have grey hair
anymore man right well you know people
don't have any gray hair no yeah man
that's weird isn't it you know of any
that's weird right
how long been on this stuff well drove
our trolley started 12 years ago mmm it
Foreman about three years ago and a man
about the same time Wow does anyone in
your family have gray hair is it a
genetic issue
my father has old gray hair my brother's
about 1/3 Cory off grace Wow as your
brother taking the stuff you're taking
only recently uh-huh interesting yeah we
call that an N of
in an experiment which is insufficient
right so I don't want to get slapped on
the wrist by medical schools on society
who's saying all these things you're
just answering questions sir do not
worry
right but so far so good if I'm around
in another 100 years we'll know
something's odd that would be
unbelievably fascinating if your dog
lived to be like 30 or 40 years old that
would be really incredible and if I meet
you in 15 years you still have dark hair
I'll be like what what the hell man what
are the things are you taking do you
take multivitamins I take vitamin D
that's it with k2 just vitamin D yeah
what about E or K or any of those k2 and
D together and that's it Oh hmm so I'm
afraid of iron rate of it yeah why
there's some results that I've seen that
that excess iron especially in the
elderly leads to senescence of cells and
buildup of those zombie cells is a bad
thing and is this dietary iron like from
vegetables or is it from cooking on a
cast-iron pan or well I only know from
correlations so I'm looking at tissue
that's full of iron and the cells are
not looking good so all I can think is I
don't want to overload my cellphone R so
this is like hmm how much iron is too
much iron we don't know yet because I
always hear it especially from women the
iron deficiencies for some reason I hear
I've heard it from several women sure
but for the elderly overloading them
with iron I think is a real problem so
there's a sweet spot to hit well yeah
I'm sure I'm sure there is but the iron
will will damage your cells pretty badly
so you don't want to go overboard mm-hmm
and no other supplements now I try to
eat vegetables which hopefully will
right make sure I'm not deficient in
anything green leafy dark vegetables
exactly exactly that's fresh if I can
colorful straight out of the fridge
instead of going for the four
a piece of cooked meat I'll go for a
carrot or something late so many carrots
I probably turn orange no carrots have a
lot of sugar oh great now got to cut out
my carrots well I mean especially if you
drink them in the juice form like I know
a lot of friends who really enjoy fruit
juices and vegetable juices and I always
say well I mean that vegetable juice
yeah it's probably great but fruit juice
man drinking a big glass orange juice
you might as well be having a coca-cola
yeah
yeah I agree so our household has a ban
on smoothies and fruit juices and so
does that have sugar in them I used to
be able to go to like Jamba Juice and
get one of those big ol smoothies and
feel like you're doing something good
for your body I used to think yeah look
at I got all this blueberries in there
and great stuff but meanwhile there's
just a gang of sugar in that thing yeah
I heard an interesting thing that that
whole milk is actually potentially
better for you than the low-fat oh yeah
you'll use less of it and it doesn't you
know milk has some sugar in it it's also
attached to fat right the whole milk has
fat in it it's normal it's normal for
your body to cross movement that way
right what what I want is I want my
money back from the nutritionists in the
1970s and 80s I
I skipped eggs and Bakey I could have
been eating that stuff well you remember
that food pyramid that used to be in the
dr. Seuss books you're teaching kids to
eat cereal you know it's so crazy and I
put my drain on your bread oh that's the
best that's the the best bad advice that
they ever gave vegetable oils which are
fucking terrible for you all those
disgusting vegetable our and corn oil
all that stuff that's just terrible
terrible for you it is the other thing
that that mothers used to and to some
extent still tell that kids is don't go
hungry have a snack yeah I shouldn't say
mothers parents in general but in my
family it's it's my wife she hates to
see our kids go hungry at all right so
it's always 888 never be hungry and I'm
there saying no be hungry it's good for
you and it's this the same with children
though because children are growing I
always assumed that children did you
just eat whenever they're hungry
well that's what stated I'm not sure if
that's the case often my son is somewhat
my son isn't then put it that way and
he'll we going out the door and my wife
will say have you had breakfast no I'm
not hungry
you have to eat something and I'm
thinking no you got plenty of energy
stored there don't worry about it
yeah I mean it makes sense the only
thing that I think of is that when
you're a young person your body is still
actually growing and developing as
opposed to you and I if we're fasting it
makes sense right it makes sense you're
you're giving your body a break and
there's all sorts of proven benefits to
that fasting process and well if you
have a child who's overweight it is it a
bad thing to skip a meal no no it's not
the one-day thing that worries me about
children that are overweight skipping a
meal though is that they're not as
disciplined and they're not so good
psychologically with struggling and and
having you know having hunger pangs and
that you're gonna fuck their head up
it's great the teachers will probably be
very angry with me that the kids can't
concentrate well it's not just that yeah
the kids can't concentrate but I just I
worry that it's in some way shape or
form abusive like to say hey you're
overweight you need to lose weight like
I don't think they're like I don't think
they're really designed to go without
the way way a grown adult does these are
my own perceptions I think that it's
probably far better to adjust their diet
and if you've got a kid just slowly get
their body weight down with exercise
particularly with resistance training
and doing things that really burn off a
lot of calories and then just get them
off the sugar and then I think the way
it'll slowly slip off probably not even
so slowly if you can really get them off
a significant sugar binge exactly so
that's why I'm taking my son to the gym
as well I agree with that
yeah I'm just just to clarify because I
don't want a bunch of hate mail all I'm
saying is don't force-feed a kid yes yes
yeah don't force-feed a kid yeah I agree
with that but I just think that kids
they just get so fucking hungry man they
get cuz they're out their little bodies
or like little hummingbirds you know
they're burning so much energy yeah they
do
I'm amazing you don't take any other
supplements just vitamin D no
multivitamins you don't want to like
cover all your bases no whole food
supplement like vitamin or a plant-based
supplement that you could take during
the day no none of that um you know I'm
subscribed to the idea that a lot of its
expensive urine and you know I'm testing
myself so I know if I'm deficient in
something bad and all my vitals are
close to optimal mmm so something's out
of whack oh I'll see it probably so you
were saying you'd do things for the
government what do you do did I say that
yeah you said that earlier you said I
should ask you and I didn't he did man
even before the show started I was
outside um I was feeling frisky now that
I've thought about it it's time to go to
jail well talk about the get you in
trouble so let's pause and think this
for a moment the things you can't talk
about please don't there's a lot to talk
about
I just have to make sure it's nothing
that's confidential but there's a lot of
interesting stuff going on on the planet
there's there's areas of bio defense
that are pretty scary
so some nations are apparently working
on using CRISPR and other gene editing
systems and modifying bugs that could
wipe out a few hundred million people
pretty quickly what do you do how do you
detect that even the flu that's a
massive bio threat and it may just be
natural and that could wipe out another
hundred million people like you did
exactly a century ago so I'm work on
that stuff detecting viruses wiping them
out cleaning a room of DNA making sure
that everything's clean I'm so I'll give
you an example so that the Navy SEALs
came up to my lab and they'd like to ask
our group to solve some hard problems
and so the problem they set us on was
how do you kill anthrax say
right now it's very difficult to kill of
course when the anthrax letter was open
in the Senate what was it a number of
years ago it cost 25 million dollars
they had to seal it off and put our Jim
peroxide all over everything destroyed
the computers so they're wondering how
do you kill anthrax safely so that you
don't have to be in a hazmat suit to do
it and so what we came up with after
thinking about it for about a week was
we need a biological solution not a
chemical and we found a an organism that
where its whereabouts I cannot disclose
but it's a very interesting organism
that grows at high temperature and it
destroys all bacterial and viral life
and it wipes it out and it doesn't hurt
humans at all you as or at least in
animal studies you can breathe it in you
can put it anywhere and it's fine so
this is a a cocktail of enzymes that
destroys the microbes including anthrax
so it doesn't have any effect on humans
but what about the bacteria that lives
in our body
well we haven't eaten it yet what we're
hoping to do is to do a clinical trial
soon on removing biofilms so in the
wounds of patients the problem that they
the reason they don't heal very well
especially these diabetic chronic wounds
that by the way that every 10 minutes
someone's losing a limb thanks to that
these biofilms you have to digest them
off and you know how they do it right
now they scrub them off it's horrific
then they cut the skin and they keep
cutting and they cutting and eventually
you lose a limb this looks really
promising in animal studies that we
should be able to not just kill the
bacteria in the wound which is a problem
but get rid of that biofilm that's
amazing so things like Mercer staph
infections exactly so able to stop it in
its tracks before it gets systemic right
spray this stuff on a cruise line for
for the virus norovirus even if it turns
out to be that safe why not just wipe
down schools oh because I always worry
about the the negative aspect like
what's gonna happen like what's what's
gonna be the blowback right like
antibiotics
is with created medicine resistant
antibiotic staph infections right right
right your mind always jumps to the
worst possible it's me bro blow it we'd
make a good good team so I'm the I got a
buddy cop movie yeah let's do it
so we've tested does it induce
antibiotic resistance and so far it's
negative mmm okay interesting oh another
thing I'll tell you so I work with a
company that detects organisms so we
want to detect if there's another virus
coming across the planet so how do you
do that quickly and how do you do it if
you don't know what you're looking for
so we can take a drop of blood or a swab
off the table and we can see all the
organisms that are there we can do your
microbiome but that's easy we can do a
so drop a blood will tell you all the
bacteria and viruses in there and it'll
tell you how to kill it which is great
for healthcare because right now
microbiology labs I've worked in one I
used to swab urine and poop on plates it
was very glamorous that's how it's still
done that is that's 19th century early
20th century technology crawl on a plate
wait a few days see what grows but
that's useless for diseases like viruses
and Lyme disease Lyme disease you know
the one from ticks in you in your spine
my daughter got Lyme disease and she was
really sick she was losing her eyesight
it was serious it got into her brain and
the hospital wouldn't give her that
antibiotic because they the tests
weren't quick enough and they wouldn't
give her the antibiotic until the tests
were positive for insurance reasons and
I said just give me that give me the DNA
of my daughter a spinal fluid I'll test
it they wouldn't do that so I was
furious so I spun out a company out of
my lab with some very smart Pi
informaticians mathematicians software
engineers we built supercomputers to be
able to do this teamed up with a guy in
Stanford my friend I mentioned him
Carlos Bustamante he's the guy that did
oh maybe I shouldn't but he did a famous
person's genome recently he's been
trained on mummies and he did Kennewick
Man and
so this technology can be teamed up with
what I've done to be able to get rid of
all the human DNA out of blood sample
leave the viruses leave the bacteria and
then run that through us a computer
supercomputer all the DNA and tell you
within probably seconds eventually what
it is so my daughter would would have a
diagnosis within eventually will be just
ten minutes instead of waiting a week
Wow
Lyme disease is terrifying there are
there are so many people that are
infected with it and I know personally
maybe ten people that have it and a
couple that have had significant issues
with it that have lasted for years I
know a guy who was hospitalized for a
full year on it it's really bad and it
and it can hide as well that's the
problem yeah and it wrecks joints and a
lot of countries actually deny that they
have lung disease Australia's a good
example people are getting what seems to
be Lyme disease and no one knows if it
is or not give those samples to us we'll
tell you what's in there well it seems
to be very difficult with certain
doctors for them to tell if they don't
see that bull's eye infection
exactly so my daughter our daughter
Natalie a middle daughter she didn't
have a bull's-eye she had nothing the
first things we Bulls are also it's a
inflammation around the bite of the
ticket right and there's a there's the
actual bite and then there's a circle on
the outside of it for whatever reason
this occurs with Lyme disease but
oftentimes goes away quickly so if you
bring a person in and they have the Lyme
disease but they don't have that
bullseye anymore which is what happened
to my friend Steve's son he tried to
tell them that it was Lyme disease they
the doctors were incredulous they didn't
believe him it took till the kid had
Bell's palsy at his face exactly that's
what happened now family it's crazy and
so I was bitten by a tick last year
right behind the knee and it didn't form
a bull's-eye maybe I didn't give it time
but it definitely was a very painful
thing I could tell that there was
something going on it was really itchy
and I went to the pharmacy and I said
can I have the antibiotic it's you know
it's probably cost a few dollars for the
antibiotic and they said no we won't
give it to you till we see a bull's
and you need to bring the ticket while I
didn't bring the tick with me so again
I'm the doctors and nurses worst
nightmare I wouldn't leave until they
gave me the antibiotic and I'm glad
because I don't want to wave the wave
like give it to you they did I wasn't
gonna leave until I got it but I don't
want to wait a week you know I'm
starting to lose my did you get that
with them you say listen you dumb
motherfuckers I'm super smart I work
with jeans no not that occasion it's
temper that's anything but I know you
can always say hey I'm looking for I
start Harvard and then they probably
just really kick you out yeah what do
you say I mean how long did it take
before they listened to you so I went
through it I basically I started
spouting biology so that they knew that
I knew something about it oh it was
about 15 minutes oh that's not bad
they're not you knew what to say I can't
be there for days bye bro trust me right
let me draw you a picture they take yeah
I mean I would just think they'd want to
hand that stuff out quick with so many
people getting it it's so common I mean
we looked at a map recently on the
podcast of Lyme disease infections
across the East Coast and the East Coast
the United States obviously that's where
you live is just a hotbed it's crazy
it's everywhere well it is and I've got
friends on Cape Cod where it's really
prevalent really bad so bad that so they
keep the antibiotic in their kitchen
drawer Jesus and if you catch a quick
enough does it stop it in his tracks
yeah so the real problem is when it gets
into your bloodstream and you don't
treat it long enough or quick off
exactly and so my daughter needed it
what's called a PICC line which has
delivery the antibiotic just straight
into the heart Oh cuz they left it too
long I'd want to kill them and she
didn't have a ring of ring of
inflammation but you knew I didn't I
thought it was meningitidis bacteria in
the brain or something
oh holy leukemia was the other
possibility those dirty fucking bugs
what can be done to somehow another
eradicate those things Oh
so again why not one of my friends got a
few friends here she was working at MIT
and she's developed a way using the
CRISPR system
to kill these as you say damn little
fuckers and so there is possibly going
to be the first test of releasing a
modified organism the lime organism to
kill them off Wow and you know that's
gonna cause some new superbugs it's
gonna kill everybody it's gonna be like
that a Brad Pitt movie the zombie one
World War Z my pee but on the other hand
we might all be saved from Lyme disease
yeah we I would like that that would be
great
I just I mean where did Lyme disease
come from there was some conspiracy
theory website that was thinking that
Lyme disease was some sort of a some
sort of a biological weapon that's
probably bullshit I'm sure but it came
out it was in Lyme Connecticut right it
does it wasn't that one of the first
cases yeah so that's close enough to
Harvard just stayed away it's I thought
he said Russians were behind it
oh no I said conspiracy theory I didn't
say it was Russian but as a biological
weapon it's uh it's just an awful thing
and that and now there's the I'm sure
you're aware of the Lone Star tick that
gives people that alpha-gal the disease
the one that makes you allergic to red
meat mm-hmm just I mean where was that
before it's crazy to see these things
morphing and well they're morphing and
there are a lot of bugs we don't know
somebody just published a few days ago
that they took surveys of the microbiome
on the skin mouth got across the planet
different races different foods
Geographic geography and they have a
hundred thousand different organisms
living on humanity and most of them are
unknown that's crazy right right and all
they have to do is just morph a little
bit one way or the other way and all of
a sudden people are dropping like flies
yeah and what's interesting is on the
skin and in the gut of people in India
is very different than what we have and
it different smells yeah they probably
think we smell that but I know this
because well they're wrong yeah right
yeah I smell like Old Spice but these
wounds they're actually if you want to
kill bacteria in a wound they're
different in the wounds of
people in India than they are over here
oh wow that's interesting and obviously
they have different diets too so there's
probably different things they're used
to consuming and so their gut bacteria
is different right everything's
different that genomes are different so
we need to map the globe to first know
what we're dealing with before we can
address them it just seems like a
never-ending struggle it every day is a
struggle against the natural world they
want to kill us and he is yeah
everything the little things and the big
things all of it
Wow their food so how much of your time
gets consumed with this kind of work uh
well it's so everything's all consuming
my typical day is at a going to a
company meeting going to US government
game called by Senator for an update so
probably actually let me be formal about
this Harvard University allows me to
spend twenty percent of my time outside
of the university so it's nineteen point
nine hmm you have to cover your ass here
is that we just did maybe but he tracks
their time now anymore but I would think
that with a guy like you who's so you
concentrate so much you're so focused on
anti anti anti aging that having a
gigantic workload would seem to me to be
that would be an issue in terms of like
over taxing your system stressing
yourself out so nobody's ever asked me
that and it's a really good question but
I'm not really worried about dying
actually I'm not worried at all at all I
know is you know it was a wolf in the
room he's staring at ya you know where a
grisly death I'd probably not want that
but I've been I thought I was gonna die
on aeroplanes before and I'm pretty calm
about that so I guess that's a good test
but I do want to leave a legacy I want
to be able to say the world's better for
me being on the planet and so that's why
I do all this stuff though I try to
protect the humanity I try to protect
nature I'm trying to help with food
production my aging stuff is what I'm
known for
but I do a lot of this other stuff that
people don't know that so you
your concern is anti-aging you certainly
want people to live longer but you
yourself are more concerned with your
work than you are with your own personal
life Oh hundred percent my wife will
tell you that the reason that I look
after myself as best I can when I've got
the energy is it would be a bad look if
I'd died from heart disease tomorrow yes
the anti-aging guy well if you died from
anything other than an accident right
yeah all right so I'm trying to be a
role model for others but you know if I
if I died tomorrow that'd be fine with
me I'd like to finish my work at least I
would like to leave something behind but
what I don't want to do is to be a
burden on my kids and my grandkids yeah
and so that's what I'm also trying to
prevent yeah that would seem to me to be
the real final frontier of anti-aging is
folks that are really really old because
it seems like they would be open to try
almost anything and if you could bring
them back that would be Boober bazaar
right well our way do you think we are
from doing something like that well it
often comes as a shock to people who
don't work on this that we're already
testing these molecules in clinical
trials on elderly people I've been doing
that for a number of years now with some
positive results over at Harvard we were
giving nmn and an another molecule
called it might be 66 was the other one
called my laundry low so that the
companies called Metro biotech and it
makes super nad boosters and the drug is
called developmental drug is MIB - six -
six six - six
yeah and we're hoping that it will not
just have to give that in an alleyway
someone ah that I got to go to some
shady doctor with a weird accent that
one that one we hope to get on the
market in about three years from now
really yeah for diseases fda-approved
and so they're using it right now on
folks are testing it for safety but
we're also going to be testing later
energy we can measure actually the nad
levels that molecule I just mentioned we
can measure that in their muscles and
we'll test if that worked and will will
measure of course their endurance
because the mice that we treated with
any man they just ran and ran and ran
they actually broke the little treadmill
in my lab because that ran so far and
you're giving it to them orally or
you're injecting into them it's a little
tablet they just put food put it in
their food or something like that all
the mice yeah oh no I thought you're
talking bout the humans in the mice we
put in their drinking water hey let's
drink it it's really easy Wow and they
have no idea no idea in fact that people
who are running the treadmill have no
idea which is which but we had mice
running three kilometers and then the
Machine stopped and I get a text from
the the researcher hey the machine broke
and I said check the software and turns
out software was written to stop it
three kilometers because my mouse had
run that far before that's long and
those are old mice don't forget these
are mice the equivalent of the
equivalent of a 65 year old human really
yeah and we figured out why they run
further this isn't just try it and see
we've figured out that that the lining
of the blood vessels needs nad as you
get older
well they need it all the time but as
you get older you don't have enough nad
so the enemy and replenishes that and
allows the blood vessel lining to
respond to exercise and even grow blood
vessels if you don't exercise and so
those mice they ran and ran around they
didn't get lactate build-up as much as
didn't feel tired so in that lactic acid
buildup right Wow so muscle fatigue
would be different well they didn't seem
to get that either Wow was that just
better blood flow
we even pinched off an artery and the
body responded much better to respect
restoring blood flow which would be
great for patients who have a heart
attack whoa
now with human beings what has been the
most dramatic result that's a hard
question because a lot of its early
stage
we developed a molecule that seemed to
effectively treat a disease called
psoriasis which is the yeah Renee how's
that yeah so that that worked and that's
a molecule it's something you apply to
the skin it was a it was a pill actually
hmmm yeah how does that work what is it
doing
so it's an activator of one of these
sirtuins that we found in yeast
originally these are too and protective
enzymes in the body and they're
anti-inflammatory and so it worked well
against that disease so psoriasis has
something to do with inflammation it is
an inflammatory disorder you are all
autoimmune disorders and time for
inflammatory based disorders I believe
so really interesting
hmm because I have I have vitiligo you
don't see a little spots on my skin
where I don't have any pigment its
genetic my grandmother had it my
grandmother sister had it I wonder if
that would help me uh yeah I really
couldn't say what's the call again
which one the drug that was tested yeah
um it has a name SRT 2104 and this is
the stuff that he worked on psoriasis
yeah in a small study in New York yeah
hmm now what other what other things had
really dramatic results on humans well
we're not there yet we don't have
dramatic results is there anything
promising results on humans other than
nmn yes there are there so this mTOR i
mentioned earlier where the drug
rapamycin which is too dangerous to try
on normal people that drug has been
tried on elderly people and it boosted
their immune system in the same way that
you see with calorie-restricted mice and
so that that was an early signal that
you might be able to reverse aspects of
Aging in the elderly with that drug
now with older folks one thing you see
is the body doesn't produce collagen as
much your skin gets lacks and starts to
Sag what what things could be done to
mitigate that you mean besides Botox
itself Oh
tox doesn't really do that just freeze
your face or well it so I mouse that a
lot will it David don't worry about
protecting cancer heart disease
Alzheimer's I look better
can I look better Yeah right and the
answer is that a we don't know B we're
working on it we have we work with a
cosmetic company that so far so good but
I don't endorse products that's not me
but also what's interesting is that
these mice at least they stay younger
looking as well they don't just live
longer hmm um so this hope that I mean
the skin is a big organ okay so right
why wouldn't it stay young just like the
rest of the body
well it's certainly indicative of
whether or not a person is healthy right
if you see someone and their skin is
really saggy and fucked up looking you
assume a person's not healthy right and
actually a lot of us scientists believe
that how you look is actually a pretty
good indicator of your biological age
speaking biological age there's a being
a breakthrough the last few years being
able to tell your biological age one
parts done by insight tracker looking at
blood biomarkers but there's a new one
called the DNA clock I've heard about
this yes I have so a colleague of mine
is well known for its d4f and what it is
is so you know how DNA I said is
changing over time and the epigenome is
changing so these are like scratches on
the clock on the DVD we think we know
what those scratches are and how to
remove them and what they are little
chemicals that bind to the DNA called
methyls and the older you get the more
mentals you're you accumulate on your
DNA and we can read that with the
machine and we can very precisely say
you're roughly this age but you're
actually older or younger for your
chronological age hmm and and now we
think we can reverse that Wow how long
do you think you are away from doing
that being able to reverse there well
that's that glaucoma treatment that
we're looking at I would like to see you
take someone like a a wealthy Mel Gibson
type character and just shoot them up
with everything like just
get someone who's willing to give you a
full run of them and run it like out
like some sort of a science fiction
movie tell you what I'll do it if you'll
employ me because I'll be kicked out of
my job I'm sure you would but man I mean
it just seems like there's so many
promising things it would be really
fascinating if you could document you
could take one person it was like a
wealthy man is mid to late 60s well that
there's this orange element in
anti-aging in fact I don't even like the
term anti-aging it's what do you like
longevity research we're about to
announce maybe this is a sneak preview
for everybody an academy for aging
research of the the top I think 20
scientists in the world of banding
together to to produce white papers and
opinions but yeah we call it longevity
research and so anti-aging is is more
that the Botox and that kind of stuff
that we don't want anything to do right
but that's nonsense it's not really
anti-aging you're not doing anything
about aging you're just freezing your
skin so it doesn't move that is that to
me is one of the weirder things
especially with men when I see a man as
forehead doesn't move I want to smack
him in the mouth like what's wrong with
you sir how dare you respect it just
it's not it's a it's not like Botox or
fillers or any of those things you're
not doing anything for your health or
your actual real vitality you're just
weirdly doing something cosmetic right
yes you are and though I think the
defense is you feel better if you look
better mmm psychologically it might help
I don't think they look better though
they just look different yeah what's the
problem it is true yeah I don't spend a
lot of time thinking about the cosmetic
industry for obvious reasons I'm trying
to save humanity and and improve the
planet actually I do think we would be
judged as a as a species if an alien
came down and they said you're shootin
botulism in your face right right
exactly you are a weird you're not
allowed in the club of advanced species
well well that would only be one thing
that we were
from yeah you know but what would they
ask you they well they'd ask us have you
figured out the speed of light did ask
me why I have drawings all over my arm
no no they might appreciate art maybe
but like they'd be like why didn't you
just get it and then wash it off or
something why have to get it drilled in
your skin - well not that's coming but I
think what are that one of the most
important questions they'd asked to tell
if we are an advanced nation or advanced
species is have you figured out aging
yet mmm right deterioration yeah and you
know what we're so pathetic as a species
our answer would be you mean that's a
thing you can do something about that
and they're like come back in a thousand
years well I mean there's gotta be you
think worldwide are working in your
field sometimes of leading labs there's
about twenty thirty broadly there's a
probably a few hundred labs and are they
all in essentially the same field of
study they're all working with the same
molecules and the same parameters know
that not everyone works with molecules
but what I can tell you is we get
together in conferences and we talk
about discovering new gene that extends
lifespan and a new molecule that's
working in mice or sometimes in humans
but it's a big field now it's growing
and when I started it was the backward
of biology antioxidants etc mmm I was
very lucky to start when it was really
small and stick it out those fair amount
of criticism in those days what how so
like that it was like a lot of my
friends my supervisor said I was insane
for working on Aging that's not a thing
that's not biology really yeah Wow wait
how long ago was this so I came to the
u.s. from Sydney in 1995 went to MIT and
the scientists in the lab that I joined
Lenny gurantees lab they two students
had just started working to figure out
why yeast get old and I joined as the
third senior person to join and all the
other people in in the lab there are
about 18 19 people they said you are
nuts Lenny's lost his mind he's working
on Aging that's not a thing you should
be working on what we do which is
understanding how genes are regulated so
I called up my mom and I said I think
I've made a big mistake here
this was the thing and the guy and
everyone here says he's nuts meanwhile
you were right well you got to take some
risks in life that's one lesson yeah but
that's an interesting one right because
you were a young fellow he didn't really
totally know it was pretty lucky because
I'm in Australia right I don't know what
people are saying about this lab Sheila
right there but always been fascinated
with aging since I was four
well now though with all the promising
new discoveries I mean they have to be
eating crow as it were talk to those
people like oh hey fuckface I was right
no you know call them up in the middle
of the night drunk no I definitely
forgive people too much had some pretty
big enemies along the way that I try to
be nice is it because research and this
sort of scientific work is so
competitive yeah it is it is and there's
this belief that someone's success is
your failure it's not really that that
is the case but you don't exist in show
business - it's a weird sort of mindset
it's a very limiting mindset right and
also and this may be true in Hollywood
in science if you come up with a new
idea and you're young you're a young
turk and you're upsetting the status quo
no no the Thomas Kuhns book on structure
of scientific revolutions was just had
it had it right he wrote in the 60s
about chemistry and physics but it
applies to biology that if you can't
with a new theory that's that disruptive
the current leaders will attack you and
a myriad of chaos and you just have to
get through it and fortune out read
kroons book and I knew that this was
normal but a lot of people around me
were saying oh no people are saying
we're wrong and it's controversial we
don't want to be controversial I'm like
controversy is great that's let's do
more of that and if it's not
controversial I want to do it that is
interesting do you think that's because
the people who are the old guard are
upset they didn't fight it themselves or
they upset that your new findings will
make their work look irrelevant yes it's
probably better both but mostly it's
it's that they're worried that their
lives will be have have been in vain if
what you're working on is not true right
yeah there's a
this is an amazing documentary on the
Sphinx where these geologists are
talking about some of the water erosion
outside the area the Sphinx and they're
saying this points to the fact that
construction was thousands of years
older than they thought and you see this
one Egyptologists freaking out he's
freaked out like what evidence what
evidence of this culture you're talking
about like because it apparently it
would have predated the known dates of
2500 BC would have made it like 7000
years older than that because it would
have to be back when there was rainfall
in the Nile Valley and you could see
this guy's ego kicking in because he had
it was a professor he had been teaching
Egyptology and he was freaking out
instead of examining this evidence like
wow like talking to this geologist who
studies rocks and erosion who's really
steadfast is a Boston University
geologist dr. Robert Schoch and you know
he's saying this is evidence of water
erosion and he's like showing it and he
even showed it to a bunch of other
geologists and they all agreed and this
guy this Egyptologist and this
documentary was freaking out was like
wow that's what happens when you think
your whole life's work is horseshit yeah
it can be a blow to the ego I haven't
lived through that yet it's probably
coming but what I've noticed is that the
really successful scientists and people
in life just embrace change and you know
kind of have to I mean it doesn't mean
that that guy is a loser it just means
he was acting on incorrect information
based on what they knew before I mean
should embrace it and say look well we
know certain things were built at 2500
BC like the Great Pyramid that's been
pretty clearly established but it looks
like there were some ancient structures
that were there even before then let's
now we have new things to study they
don't look at it that way though yeah
see the problem with with how biology
and actually most facts are taught or
theories are taught is that there's a
textbook and that's the Bible : what I
try to teach my students is can you
please just forget everything you just
learnt and what's important to know is
that most things we think we know are
not correct they're going to change over
time all theories change Newton was
wrong but he helped us get here
expect that we only know you know 0.01
percent of of what we need to figure out
and a lot of what we think we know is
wrong anyway so even if you have the
greatest theory expect that it will be
overturned but you can at least cherish
the fact that you've helped us get to
that point because without Newton we
wouldn't have gone in physics well for
someone like me hearing you say that
it's very promising and it's it's it's
very encouraging but I always thought
that scientists were always going on
just data like the all they cared about
was data all they cared about is what is
correct and that was what was crucial
that's what's important this is what
they talk about this is what they study
when I found out that scientist would
would ignore information or use their
own personal biases against information
or attack research because it somehow
negates what they've done is very
disheartening for someone who's not a
scientist you go oh no the egos in
science too right it's just hardening as
a scientist I can tell you there was a
time of great change in the aging field
where we discovered genes control aging
and molecules like resveratrol could
extend health and lifespan it was it was
brutal you I'd get up and I'd give a
speech and someone to say you're wrong
this is crap and where are they now do
you call them up in the middle of night
they still home up you've done wrong
fuckers right I have a couple of glass
of wine yeah well I think the secret to
success in life is actually just
existing for long enough and all your
enemies to fall away yeah well they die
they're not into anti-aging yeah I look
like shit I can't walk anymore just have
to outlive your enemies yeah it's an
easy way that must have been a tough
time though for you as a young man and
you know you're hearing this from these
established scientists and part of you
must have been like thinking like geez
are they right sure you have to
entertain a possibility that you're
wrong that that's what we do but you go
back to lab and you retest it so I went
through a really brutal period in my
career where we had data we interpreted
it we published it in the top journals
and it was about how resveratrol works
on
that sort to an enzyme that I mentioned
and Pfizer came out with a paper that
said it's all wrong
and I had people call me up saying it
was nice knowing you I'm really sad for
you but it's over yeah bad boohead luck
and so I went back to the lab we had
some data already from years before
which I knew were interesting and it
took another thing four years to get to
the bottom of it but it turns out in the
end I was right but there were days when
I said screw Humanity Academy bothered
getting out of bed if this is how I'm
going to be treated for trying to devote
my life to the betterment of people's
lives it's tough now I think anybody
who's at in a position in their career
like that has to have gone through
really hard times
it's just discouraging from a non
scientist who relies on people like you
but someone like me who relies on the
folks like you out there doing the hard
work that you would face that sort of I
mean I guess the best way to describe it
would be ignorant well it it's okay for
scientists to challenge a theory that's
what I didn't what everybody is trained
to do but to do it in such a public end
and vish controversial it was vicious it
was definitely vicious even the words
they used or vicious which is really
hurtful but but they're wrong well they
might have been right I could be wrong
they call them up middle a night you
dumb motherfucker yeah the person who
published that paper I do think about
meeting that person again but they do
enjoyed careers it's not just it's tough
you can run out of money your students
go well sure that was happening to my
lab we went down to four people I mean
and what was the higher I mean these
days I'm but what were not before then
it was about 18 20 and you went down the
4 4 so it was looking bad oh yeah people
had written me off holy shit
but you were right when you got to push
forward it's uh you got to get lean
because you're not gonna get government
funding for a while because people think
that you you're a failure god damn
that's crazy
well sciences is not for the faint of
heart
I would imagine yeah yeah boy they
skin stubbornness only only those
survived what was the turnaround like
was there a moment where it turned
around and moved in waters favor yeah
there was there was one day when it when
it all changed so the earlier data so
what data driven the early data was that
the enzyme we could we could mutate or
change the enzyme so that it wasn't
going to be activated by research role
and we found that mutation now that just
technically or non technically
technically means that we could change
the enzyme in a way that wouldn't work
so we then put that non working enzyme
into a cell and now we have a mouse that
doesn't work and we give it resveratrol
and if it if it works
it means I'm wrong if it doesn't work
and it's blocked by that change in the
enzyme we're probably right and that's
what we did but the real the real change
was that there was a company that I
started that was making drugs the one
that cured or at least seemed to cure
psoriasis and they had made these very
synthetic molecules that were not
related to the plant molecule research
well and so I said to myself and to the
student who was working on it a very
brave student if if the change in that
enzyme also blocks the drug then we're
on to something because that means two
separate groups working on separate
types of molecules
different people different systems all
get blocked by this one little change in
the enzyme then we're right and and so
he walked over to the company he got the
molecule through it on the enzyme and it
didn't work on the mutant and that was
me rejoicing because I could say there
is a universal activation mechanism on
this one enzyme resveratrol works the
molecules at the company work and now
there's an interesting thing that just
came out from Spain that metformin the
diabetes drug may actually work the same
way as these other molecules by
activating our favorite enzyme the
sirtuin Wow
and how how much time were you in the
Darklands it was a couple of years of
hell right it gets so bad because you've
got this tight-knit group of scientists
and you have lab meetings and you
present your results and usually you're
very supportive trying to help I had one
guy saying to my student David doesn't
always talking about you shouldn't work
on this it's been proven wrong he was
dead against me in my own lab I'm paying
his salary and it's okay to be
constructive but vicious within my own
group well suffice to say he wasn't in
my group for that long Wow
now this other guy that used all these
other vicious words about you where's he
at now not sure I would know I wouldn't
know no I don't have time to look back
community forward you're nicer than me
yeah you know what um in science because
it's very collaborative and you're often
your enemies are reviewing your own mmm
work if you build up too many enemies
you want survives no it's definitely
healthier approach I'm kidding I
probably would do exactly what you did
but it stills got to be beautiful to
come out on the other end and be proven
correct and actually be at the forefront
of these emerging technologies uh well
it is I don't rest on any laurels but
the what I do is I pause and I remember
how hard it was to get here and how
fortunate I am to have made it this far
and I'm working with hundreds of
collaborators around the world to make
this come true this idea that we can
really treat aging and prevent
deterioration so I'm blessed I have an
app on my phone that I've helped
engineer what's that
it's called Lua Lu a and where's that
well it's a little company that we
bought in New York and nurses and
dentists use it to pass medical
information around but we use it to
share information between scientists
around the world and coordinate
activities between companies that I've
started yeah so there I you know I think
I mentioned to you that I've started a
few companies what I'm trying to build
our companies that are the 21st century
version of a pharma company
is actually has a decent reputation in
the world
I think it's pharmaceutical companies
whether it's deserved or not have a
pretty bad rap I'm trying not to fall
into that trap but I'm also trying to
use 21st century technology to not
become too bureaucratic as well within
the organization and that's what the Lua
app offers us you were also talking I
don't know if you talked about this
before the podcast about how you have to
make sure you have zero conflicts of
interest yeah it's hard so I don't I
don't sell any supplements I don't
endorse anything no products but if you
look on the internet you google David
Sinclair and nad or aging you'll see
that people put my name and my face all
the time on their websites and I get
questions every day every morning I wake
up which product are you endorsing mmm
and so I'd be extremely careful so do
you have to have a lawyer contact those
companies tell them to take your name
mmm yeah yeah it's a fair amount of
money always sending out cease and
desist letters but I have to do it my
reputation is everything
and I also want to be able to have
opinions on these molecules without
someone accusing me of doing it for a
profit that's what I would think would
be critical point to that and say hey he
endorses this because he's making money
yeah yeah that's what would be yeah that
would be the thing that I mean
especially because most people aren't
going to do real research and developed
a nuanced understanding of your work and
what you're doing what it means and how
long you've been studying it they go oh
he's doing it because he's making money
I'm done
you know right well you know I've made a
fair amount of money in my life my first
company even though it wasn't the major
shareholder was sold first north of 720
million dollars so that money I'm not
immune to but I do reinvest almost all
of it actually all of it my wife will
tell you into new ventures to change the
world so though the Lyme disease company
and the miv 66 company Metro these are
funded initially by me now the conflict
arises because I'm studying these
molecules in the lab and I'm on the
board of directors and advising these
companies as chairman vice chairman the
only way around that as a scientist that
we that we have is our defense as we
disclose everything
so initially I would disclose it to the
government and to Harvard all scientists
have to do that but I've gone a step
further just to try and be ultra
transparent with the public and so I
have a website if you go to my labs
website you'll see everything that I do
and and hopefully that's a protection
from being accused of being biased but
what I I definitely do in my lab is I
say to the students if you get a whiff
that I'm doing anything biased I would I
wouldn't do anything consciously but
maybe there's some unconscious bias let
me know let the University know and
we'll be fine but I've been doing this
for 25 years I think I'm pretty good at
putting a a wall between the two and the
other thing that I want everybody knows
in a lab we do very basic research we
try to understand the fundamental
reasons why we age and how to reverse it
the companies are more worried about how
we get into a clinical trial which is
very different worlds so they don't have
a lot much now when you want to bring
something to try something to the market
or you want to try something on people
what's the process let's say if you have
some sort of a molecule that you want to
try out on people what is that process
so it's a few years of often making a
better molecule but let's say you've
done that work now you you spend a year
testing it on at least two different
species usually a rodent a mouse and a
dog and but you try to do everything you
can before that to make sure it's not
going to be unsafe testing our own cells
and other things that are not living or
at least not not don't feel anything but
the FDA Food and Drug Administration of
the u.s. requires if you can make a drug
you have to test it on at least two
different species so that's what you do
and then it's you're going to what's
called phase one which is safety testing
takes one to two years Phase two is what
we call efficacy which is does it really
work potentially so you test that on 50
to 100 people maybe it works maybe it
doesn't most things fail if it looks
good then you go into Phase three which
is 50 to 200 million dollars worth of
experiments I'm testing it on hundreds
of patients and if that goes well then
you apply to the FDA
to be licensed at the seller drug so the
amount of money that it must cost to
bring something to of my ears open
you're like oh it's it's hard
must be staggering it's it's staggering
to raise that much money and that that's
one of the reasons that these big
numbers come up often we have to tap the
public markets to be able to afford it a
typical drug will cost in hundreds of
millions of dollars some drugs have
failed after 700 million dollars
investment oh yeah but but look at the
upside if we're successful at having a
drug that treats aging you know we'll
treat a disease like diabetes first but
then it could become the best-selling
drug of all time if it's proven safe who
wouldn't want to have a drug that could
protect them from all these major
diseases yeah but how much would
something like you'd have to sell it for
so much money to make up for all the
research money right is that how it
works that's how it usually works but
for the first time I'm in control of
many of these companies and I have a
large say in them at least and I as an
individual and pledging that we won't do
that we're not going to put prices up to
what the market can bear we want this is
a gift to the world and so that's a very
different approach and that's one of the
reasons that I've in large part use my
own money to do these things so I can
have that say and do what's right for
the planet so when you do do that how
will you decide how much something costs
based on the ability to just maintain
the company well yeah we have to be
profitable otherwise it'll it all goes
away right but not to the point of
extortion know there's that there's a
nice middle ground what right you don't
want to be like that guy that went to
jail for the AIDS drug what's that
assholes name you know that kid you know
Oh squirrely yeah that kinds Carly you
know I have a very different view and
I'm hoping that we'll have a new type of
pharmaceutical company emerging out of
what we're doing that's amazing right
because pharmaceutical drug companies
are always thought as being a devil
meanwhile they're responsible for so
many things to keep people alive as well
but because the fact that
connected to things like oxycontin and
fentanyl and things that kill people and
it's been proven that there are certain
unscrupulous drug companies that have
pushed things out there that they know
have negative effects because they knew
they get profit from it right well that
not everybody is it ethical but as long
as I have a say in these companies that
will be ultra ethical you got to make
sure that you stay alive they're gonna
try to take you out bro well yeah I
don't know about that but you out take
control the company I founded the
profits I found like-minded investors
for the first time that's amazing - I
mean how how have you managed to
cultivate that relationships it's it's
harder than going with a pitch to a
capitalist but it's mainly meeting the
right people I want to see that they're
on board - I don't want to just have
somebody who's out to make a profit
right but you still can make a profit
still be profitable but don't go crazy
right right and help the world yeah and
so we just recruited to one of the
boards of the company someone from a
consumer company which is a strange
choice right but this is a person who's
done right at that company for the world
a company that used to make just some
consumer products that weren't healthy
and he turned that around and that's the
kind of person I want to work with who
cares about the planet more than they
care about the ultimate profit that's
awesome man listen keep me keep me in
the loop I want to know what's going on
and I'm gonna try all these things you
said so I'm gonna go out I'm gonna buy
some nmn I'm gonna buy some resveratrol
I got to find a quack that's willing to
prescribe me metformin I've got you know
we'll talk later and then the other
stuff the SRT 2104 that stuff where
would one get that that's experimental
that's probably hottest one and to help
you with you need to pay somebody off um
anything else I need to know about that
it have you had you know are done just
23andme
basically you know I haven't is there
more extensive versions of it than that
there are
in there a few thousand bucks do you
whole genome and we could do that but I
don't think you'll learn a lot more
mainly because we're ignorant as to what
the other stuffs doing right it was
pretty interesting though you know as
far as finding out about my ancestry and
where my relatives come from yeah it's a
good start I learned some really
interesting things too about my origins
and I'm carrying Cystic Fibrosis tea and
whatever Wow but what's cool is now
we're merging you can merge that data
with the inside tracker data and have
this ultimate you know personal angel
for health that will hopefully one day
be on all of us that we've got the
personal tracking device it'll tell us
if there's something going wrong if you
are a cancer cell detected go get that
eliminated
it's crazy these days we have to wait
till there's and actually a tumor that's
making you sick before you usually go to
the doctor an actual issue well now I
know why you're so excited about the
future so you you have an inside track
on this yea front row seat and I'm glad
to share a little bit with your
listeners oh thank you I really really
appreciate it tell the listeners and the
viewers what your website is oh I just
have a Harvard website but I will be
I'll tweet about this I'm launching a
website for a book that I plan that I'm
writing now it's gonna come out later
this year we hope when it comes out come
on back we'd love to
all right update thank you David really
really appreciate it that's it bye
everybody
[Music]
[Applause]